[00:00:00.000 --> 00:00:29.340] since last year, I've just had this existential dread and also hope and optimism in the same hour, in the same thought process of like, what is even a company going forward? What are these structures going forward? And this is the only durable one structure that I could actually imagine lasting for quite some time. And it was coming from a place of like, wow, is our company just going to be completely irrelevant in the next coming years?

[00:00:30.000 --> 00:01:16.410] Jack Dorsey All right, everybody, we had Jack Dorsey on the pod today, founder of Twitter and founder of Block. He's the only founder to have two of his companies end up on the S&P 500. Just learned that today. That's pretty cool. Also, Rulaf Botha, who's a SCOI partner and is on Jack's board at Block. The conversation was super interesting to me. He recently put an article out that you may have seen, a call from Hierarchy 2,

[00:01:17.290 --> 00:01:46.410] and it's a manifesto on how to re-think, basically, from the first principles, how an organization works. How do you completely eliminate hierarchy and how do you put AI right in the center and transform how your company works? And I let him go on that. And he was very thoughtful and he spoke a lot about it. Block has really changed in the way it's organized. Before we started, he said, I'd love to get some feedback from you and from other people on this. And he said, I'd love to get some feedback from you and from other people on this. And he spoke a lot about it. Block has really changed the way it's organized.

[00:01:46.410 --> 00:02:11.370] So if you get comments on it, let her rip. He wants some feedback on it. He's in the early innings of a big transformation over there. That was about half of it. The second half of it, I just asked him for like CEO advice. I work with lots of CEOs, as you folks know. Like, how do you build an amazing board? He's certainly got some scars around board building. How do you build your second act? Like the cash app versus the original business of Square.

[00:02:12.690 --> 00:02:39.870] Is it a good idea to be a CEO of two different companies at the same time? Being brave and not giving a flock versus going with the flow. And when do you really dig in? And when do you kind of go with the flow? And he had some really interesting thoughts on the job of a modern CEO. So tune in. I'll be back at the end and give you some further thoughts. But I thought Jack did a really nice job and in real life did too. Let's get into it. Jack, I read your piece. I think it's fantastic.

[00:02:40.350 --> 00:03:10.210] From hierarchy to intelligence. Before we get into the meat of what it is, can you describe what you think is wrong with the way normal companies hierarchies work? Companies like HubSpot, companies like Block. Like what kind of led you to this? I don't know if there's one thing that's ultimately wrong. It's just it's it's recognizing that like what what do we what do we see in the in the pattern? What is the function of the hierarchy?

[00:03:11.130 --> 00:03:34.130] And what we wanted to explore is just like where does it actually come from and why did why does it exist in the first place? And if you look at it from first principles, it's all about information flow to a broad base of people. So being able to communicate over a breadth of of people and have that be manageable at a human scale.

[00:03:34.130 --> 00:04:03.970] So we've gotten into structures that, you know, we've borrowed and iterated on a little bit over 2000 years. Yeah. And now we're we're facing this, I think, a completely foundational moment in being able to question every element of how we work. And the one that I think is questioned the least is probably the hierarchy and probably about how we manage communication flow around the companies.

[00:04:03.970 --> 00:04:21.290] So if if we're in a world where we are today, where block, for instance, is completely remote or we're remote first, every single thing that we do creates some sort of artifact, whether it be a Slack message, an email, pull request code.

[00:04:22.330 --> 00:04:45.710] You know, all these Google document, a meeting that we record, all these things have these artifacts of information about how the company is is working, as building, as failing, as making mistakes, all these things. And traditionally, we've been relying upon humans in a management structure and a hierarchy to go up and down a chain to relay that information.

[00:04:46.310 --> 00:05:08.890] Instead, we can take all of those artifacts and put an intelligence on top of it, build a model around it and actually have a conversation with the company about how the company is doing it. And it's not just me as CEO that can do that, but anyone in the company could have that same sort of access to information and and same understanding of like what the company can do.

[00:05:08.890 --> 00:05:35.790] So you get to a point where you can build these world models for companies like treat the company as a as a mini AGI, for instance, an artificial general intelligence, because it really is. I mean, if you look at the company, it is an intelligence, but it hasn't been structured in the way that's the most efficient or the least lossy in terms of information flow and what people can actually do within the company.

[00:05:35.790 --> 00:06:05.230] So the technology is good enough today that we can actually model the company. We can have everyone in the company put in intent, which would be strategy or these artifacts. And we can also have everyone in the company query it as well. And and it just it really opens the door for what's possible. Like, you know, Roloff and I have a board meeting every quarter where we we construct a bunch of board docs, slides, presentations.

[00:06:06.810 --> 00:06:28.270] We get only so much time for them to have questions. But imagine if every single board member can just query the company and have a conversation with the company's intelligence in real time. And we can make that that meeting time that we that we have every quarter really focused on more of the creative or bigger existential decisions and issues than the day to day.

[00:06:28.370 --> 00:06:58.370] The same can be said for like our earnings call and analysts, like giving them like fully reg FD possible information that is on their timeline with with their questioning. But you can scale this to any position or any role in the company, which is pretty phenomenal. And we've just never had that ability before. And and now we do. And, you know, I think the the architecture and the structure of the company is ultimately going to determine its velocity and how well it's roadmapped for customers.

[00:06:58.370 --> 00:07:24.190] Correct. And just kind of drilling down on it, can you describe sort of what the organization looked like before? And granted, you're very early in this, but what's it look like now? Which roles have been eliminated? What are the new roles? Just kind of drill down a little bit into what block looks like today and kind of where it's going. Yeah, we we are early in it.

[00:07:24.190 --> 00:07:53.810] I mean, just from a, you know, one one measurement of of how far along we are would be the depth from me to any other individual in the company. And I would say our max depth right now is probably five folks between me and anyone in the company. I would want to get that down to two to three this year. And in the most ideal case, you know, there there is no layer.

[00:07:54.010 --> 00:08:22.050] Everyone in the company reports to me and that would be, you know, all all six thousand of other company. And that feels somewhat, you know, ridiculous when you consider like the old structure. But when you consider that the majority of our work is going through this intelligence layer, it's a lot more manageable. And it that goes into the roles going forward. We want to normalize down to just three roles.

[00:08:22.490 --> 00:08:52.110] The first is an IC, which is a builder or an operator. This is a salesperson. It's an engineer. It's a designer. Product person, like, you know, whatever it is, they're actually working with the tools to build or to operate the company. They're augmented because they have access to agents. So, you know, one person can potentially do the work or explore the breadth that, you know, it would take a team or, you know, 10 people to do in the past.

[00:08:52.570 --> 00:09:21.250] So that's number one. And I think there's a durable human skill that lasts there, which is judgment and taste and creativity. So that's probably the largest part of the population is the builder and the operators, ICs. The second role is the DRI. And that's someone who can own the customer outcomes. They're putting a strategy together. They're understanding what roadmap allows us to solve customer needs and problems.

[00:09:21.910 --> 00:09:51.710] And they're assembling a team of these ICs to get something done. But the durable human skill there is ownership and accountability. You know, they're really owning the outcomes and whether something is failing or not. And then the last role would be what we consider managers today, which we're calling a player coach. This is someone who is building the capability and the capacity of other humans and their craft.

[00:09:52.370 --> 00:10:21.610] But instead of telling them how to do it, they're showing them how to do it by doing the work. So these are people who might be ICs or they might be DRIs. But they're also really good at giving coaching skills, at a coaching skill to help the people around them get better and better and master their craft. And today, that's a management structure where ICs and even DRIs report to a player coach.

[00:10:21.970 --> 00:10:45.050] But I think in the future, it's an assignment. It's not a reporting structure, but I'm assigned to ICs or I'm assigned to DRIs to help them master their craft. And obviously, the durable human skill there is building human capacity and coaching. And there's a lot of empathy there and, you know, all the soft skills that we recognize great managers are known for.

[00:10:46.550 --> 00:11:15.550] But not making a requirement that they have to be strategic necessarily. They have to build because they need to show off the skill and teach in that way, but they don't necessarily need to be a DRI. In very rare cases, one person can take on all three of those roles. I think I can take on all three of those roles. My leadership team is expected to take on all three of those roles. They're expected to build as an IC or operate the company.

[00:11:15.990 --> 00:11:43.190] They're expected to be strategic and actually think about roadmaps and customer outcomes. And they're expected to coach and help raise the skill level around them with the people that they work with, with their direct team. But just a little kind of before and after, and you're mid on this, and let's pretend like it's working great and it's two years from now. And it's extremely flat. Like, what is the role of the CEO before and after? Most of the listeners, by the way, are CEOs.

[00:11:45.270 --> 00:12:11.170] What does, like, planning look like before and after? What happens to all those people who are directors and managers or the kind of glue people? Like, what are kind of the before and afters in your mind? I think my job as CEO in the past I've thought about it in three ways. Number one is to ensure that we have the right principles and the right team dynamic.

[00:12:11.410 --> 00:12:40.910] And that's like hiring and firing and setting values and setting the culture and setting the tone. The second is to ensure that decisions are being made in context of our customers and industry trends and competition. And the third would be to raise the bar on our execution. Like, to constantly increase our capability and to push ourselves into doing things that are uncomfortable so that we're growing all the time. So, that's how I thought about my job up until this point.

[00:12:40.910 --> 00:13:04.310] I think in the future, you have those elements, certainly. But I think it's more about, like, the architecture of how the company as an intelligence works. And, like, if we're building the company as an intelligence, our job as humans and my job as CEO is to constantly align it to where we think the right outcome is.

[00:13:04.310 --> 00:13:27.050] And I see, like, you know, visually, I see the intelligence, the world model for the company in the center. And then on the edge are the humans who are just constantly aligning this towards customer outcomes. But even that changes, I believe, because I think a company's ultimate limiting factor is its own roadmap.

[00:13:27.670 --> 00:13:57.350] And I think what these technologies point to are that our customers are going to, they're going to have the expectation that they can ask for a feature that doesn't exist on our roadmap and that it just is served to them. And that's where, like, you really get into the layers of, like, okay, so what do we actually build? We build up capabilities, which are effectively our tools. Like, we can issue cards, we card acceptance, peer-to-peer lending, all these things we do as a financial technology company.

[00:13:58.010 --> 00:14:26.590] We have these interfaces like Square, which has a register and a dashboard. We have Cash App. We have Tidal. We have BitKey. We have Proto. These are interfaces. These actually touch the real world, touch humans, and we can deliver our capabilities in these interfaces. Today, they're built with, like, these very specific navigations that are our roadmap and our understanding of what our customers want. When you move to the third layer, you have proactive intelligence. We have all this understanding of our customers.

[00:14:27.130 --> 00:14:54.770] We're moving money. Money is the most honest signal in the world. You can lie about literally everything, but when a transaction occurs, like, that's something that, like, really tells the truth about your life or your business's life. And based on that, we can actually prompt our customers instead of waiting for them to prompt us or having the right question to ask. So we can do the very simple but very valuable thing of, like, how do we protect our customers' cash flow?

[00:14:55.270 --> 00:15:23.930] Like, we have people using us as a bank account. How do we make sure that they can pay the rent and they can pay their Spotify bill and they can pay their kids' allowance? And this is all sequenced in a way that allows them to never go to zero, never go negative, and have some cushion that allows them to even think about getting to saving or building wealth. And that's just, you know, peace of mind, I think, is the most critical aspect here.

[00:15:26.550 --> 00:15:50.550] So if we're enabling a customer, if we're able to prompt a customer and also they can ask, like, as a business, hey, I have this inventory thing that I've been using, but it's missing this feature. Can I have this feature? We should just be able to build that and compose it in real time based on our capabilities. If we can't, and it points to a deficiency in capabilities or a gap, that's our roadmap.

[00:15:51.250 --> 00:16:19.970] So our customers, just by using and talking with our systems, are telling us what our roadmap should be, and then it's up to us to give the judgment. And then the final layer is the world model. It's the customer world model. It's the company world model, our deep understanding of ourselves and also our customers. But I think, like, if I had to say one thing that, you know, myself or anyone in the company has to do, it's, I guess it's this overused phrase of judgment.

[00:16:20.470 --> 00:16:48.450] But it is judgment against, like, what we intend to build in the world. And is it on, is it aligned with that judgment? Is it aligned with the values? Is it aligned with the taste that we have? And is it unique or is it not? And I guess for my part, I'm the extra checkpoint on, like, is the alignment circle of humans, the edge of humans actually working correctly. And this, I see how this works exceptionally well for block. You have a lot of signal.

[00:16:49.210 --> 00:17:18.870] How does this work for, I don't know, Sierra Workday, somebody who doesn't have the quality signal, the frequency of signal? Does it apply or it doesn't work as well? I think it probably does. I think it goes down to, like, are you building a business that, like, understands something of human nature deeply and it gets deeper every single time? And that's a real tangible signal that just doesn't go away. And if you are, then I think you can build your company as an intelligence.

[00:17:18.870 --> 00:17:38.230] If you're not, then it's probably an add-on to something else. And I think most of the industry is thinking about AI as, like, a co-pilot, as something that is augmented onto rather than, like, how do you just rebuild this, our whole company with this as the core?

[00:17:38.230 --> 00:18:07.710] Like, and if it doesn't make sense for your business to do that and you end up being or looking very similar or rhyming too closely with the frontier labs, then I think it's going to be very, very challenging to differentiate and survive. And that's kind of what's been leading me to all this is, like, I just, you know, since January of 2024, which is when these tools really came to bear.

[00:18:07.710 --> 00:18:36.010] Like, Goose, which is an agent coding harness, was one month before CloudCode in January of 2024. And CloudCode came out that following month and then, like, was really put out of beta in May of that year. And, you know, that whole year I just spent every single day for three hours every morning just pushing myself, like, can I get it to do something that I didn't think it was capable of or I didn't think I was capable of?

[00:18:36.010 --> 00:18:54.230] And every single day it worked. Like, every single day I was surprised. And it's, you know, it's, I'm sorry, it wasn't 2024, it was 2025. It's only been a year of those tools, like one year. It just, the compounding nature of this is pretty incredible.

[00:18:54.230 --> 00:19:23.530] So, you know, being able to, like, see that, understand it, and then shift your company to be ahead of it, I think is absolutely critical right now. And I don't think people are feeling it enough. They're just living in this abstraction. Like, oh, yeah, like, these tools will make everyone in our company 10x more productive. I don't think this is a productivity thing. I think it's a structural thing that needs to shift. I think you're right.

[00:19:23.670 --> 00:19:44.890] I think people are thinking of it as co-pilots and individual productivity versus your, I think your idea is complete business transformation. And I think it's super interesting and compelling. Can I add one thought I've had as I've listened to this so far? You know, one of the, one of my favorite pieces of writing ever is Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations.

[00:19:45.550 --> 00:20:11.430] And this idea that if you have the right signals, you can rely on the self-interested behavior of many small participants in the system to actually lead to optimal outcomes. But you need to have the right framework and the right system. I think the way that many companies work today is a little bit more command and control. Very much. And you have hierarchies and you have political actions and people, you know, are jockeying for position. And it's, it's not always clear what is actually true.

[00:20:11.910 --> 00:20:40.890] And I think part of what we're envisioning here is you have a system that's just ground truth. And you do away with all the layers. You get back to the kind of productivity that founders often long for. They long for the days when there were 100 people and not 500 people because they were so much more productive. Why? Because you had, you know, lots of transparency, limited hierarchy. And so I think the possibility here, as Jack was saying, is instead of just focusing on individual productivity, you reimagine how we work together as humans.

[00:20:41.410 --> 00:21:07.290] And you can do it with far smaller number of people that are far more productive, yes. But there's a different way of working together where you get the right signals. And it's a, it's much more similar to a capitalist system where the signals tell you what to build. It's not somebody who pounds the table harder who gets their product approved, which is, listen, more customers want this than that. That's how, that's how we're going to decide what to build next. So for me, there's something quite magical in that realization. Yeah.

[00:21:07.670 --> 00:21:36.610] About four years into building HubSpot, I eliminated no org charts, no titles, and everyone lost their mind. They didn't like the idea. And we ran that for about nine months and I got worn down and I brought it back. The thing we didn't have was an intelligent system that had all those signals that could help us make decisions. So it's exciting to see this year. I have a theory I want to run by you, Rulof. Like, I sort of think of, like, there's manager mode.

[00:21:37.210 --> 00:22:03.070] It's a pyramid. The VPs make most of the decisions. And there's founder mode, kind of flat. The founder makes a lot of decisions. And then there's, I'm just going to call it Dorsey mode. It's a circle. And the AI makes most of the decisions. Do you buy that? Oh, I don't think the AI makes most of the decisions. I think that, and Jack should correct me here, I think the AI helps with communicating the alignment.

[00:22:03.910 --> 00:22:29.930] And the management team or the inner core helps set the framework. What is the objective function? Are we optimizing for growth rate, gross profit per employee, net promoter score? Probably some combination of those variables. And the humans at the edges perform an incredibly valuable function of correcting and informing and sort of steering that. And I think one of the phrases that Jack has, which I absolutely love and I've stolen so many times, is companies have multiple founding moments. Yeah.

[00:22:30.810 --> 00:22:58.350] There's so many smart people in your company that have clever ideas that every day inflect a product, introduce something new. And so this idea that there's just, you know, one person who is the brilliant person who comes up with everything. I just don't think, you know, I don't believe in hero worship or the converse of that where you sort of scapegoat people. I think it's harnessing the best of your team to really advance the company. So I subscribe to the circle idea. Yeah, I also don't think the AI is making the majority of the decisions.

[00:22:58.570 --> 00:23:27.090] I think it's facilitating a more context rich decision. I think ultimately, like in the most ideal case, our customers are actually making the majority of the decisions because they're just based on their queries and what they're trying to do with the system. Delaney, it's like where our roadmap should go. And then it's up to our judgment as to whether that's consistent with what we want to be and what we think is most strategic or not.

[00:23:28.290 --> 00:23:46.310] But we just, you know, we weren't able to get to that level of data fidelity before because we had to infer it. We had to do customer research. We had to do interviews. We had to do look at our customer support, you know, product feedback on Twitter, all these other things.

[00:23:46.770 --> 00:24:12.350] But when your interface is a conversation with your customer instead of like this visual navigation, you suddenly get like this amazing fidelity of like what do our customers actually care about? What do they actually want? And it's up to us then to decide if that's consistent with what we want to be as a company or if they should be going elsewhere to do that. And I think all these things are going to blur.

[00:24:12.550 --> 00:24:40.470] I mean, that's the craziest thing is like, you know, again, since last year, I've just had this existential dread and also like hope and optimism in the same hour, in the same thought process of like, what is even a company going for? Like what like what are these structures going forward? And this is the only like durable one structure that I could actually imagine lasting for quite some time. Yeah.

[00:24:40.990 --> 00:25:06.630] And it was coming from a place of like, wow, is our company just going to be completely irrelevant? The you know, in the next coming years or even even sooner, like what do we what do we actually differentiate on? What what do we have a moat around and what what do we need to be to defend and also to to grow that? And like what are the and all that follows from customer expectation?

[00:25:06.630 --> 00:25:35.630] Like the most amazing thing about OpenClaw to me was that people wanted to take this thing and contain it into a Mac mini and make it very tangibly theirs and have all this agency around what they did with it. And we're seeing Square sellers do stuff with it like that interface with the Square APIs. And we're seeing Cash App customers.

[00:25:35.950 --> 00:26:02.270] And these are like not tech people. These are just like people I want to I want a bot to help me manage my life. That agency, independent of your thoughts on like how good of a system OpenClaw is right now, it'll get better and better. But the intent behind that is agency. I want to tangibly control this intelligence and and for it to better. And what it makes possible for me is incredible.

[00:26:02.490 --> 00:26:16.010] And that expectation floor has just risen dramatically. And that leads me again to like, yeah, our limiting factor as a company is our roadmap. Like we need to remove that from the equation.

[00:26:16.010 --> 00:26:39.650] We need to ensure that our customers are truly building alongside us and and that they are seeing us as a as a series of capabilities that makes their desires fast and easy and and valuable. So like it really goes back to the capability set that we have and then like the intuition of the interface that we have.

[00:26:39.650 --> 00:27:05.430] And then like how intelligent our world models can can be to to be helpful and to compose UI in real time. I spent this morning at a company called Rogo here in New York City. They read your article. Let's say you're advising the CEO of a hundred person company. They've already got their hierarchy. What should they do? Should they start with their system? Should they start with data? Should they start with the org?

[00:27:05.430 --> 00:27:33.590] Like how should people go about, you know, running the Dorsey playbook? I don't know about this Dorsey playbook thing, but we don't have it all figured out. I think there's an important dose of humility that we have that we're endeavoring on this path. We believe it's right, but we know there's a lot to figure out. Yeah. It's more like if you were to at a hundred people or even, you know, just starting today, if you were to build your company as an AGI, as an intelligence, what would it look like?

[00:27:33.870 --> 00:28:03.530] And what would you need to really differentiate? Like if I were starting a company today, I would be so excited about how quickly I could build things and how quickly I could prototype and get things out to customers. I would be in this like valley of dread about distribution and attention because there is so much noise out there. And it's so hard to get to the actual signal of like who's building something interesting that will actually fundamentally change something

[00:28:03.530 --> 00:28:32.090] and will be around for more than a year. It just like, I think distribution really becomes a differentiator. And I think there's some event horizon where the way we think about distribution today closes off. You know, like there's apps, for instance, and websites and like the traditional retail. There's a number of things that will change.

[00:28:32.090 --> 00:29:01.970] And if you don't have the distribution today, it's going to be very hard to fight for that. But there'll be new areas of distribution that are probably more important. And I don't know what those look like. But I would say like, I would assume that a company of 100 probably is no more than two to three layers deep, hopefully. And now would be the time to just like really question, like, do I need a hierarchy? Like, Brian, a year into Square, I also, we removed titles.

[00:29:02.130 --> 00:29:30.390] We normalized everyone to lead. We did it for like, we were talking with all these banks all the time. And you would have these EVPs and VPs. And they were looking for the same on the business card. And there's this whole business card culture. So we ripped up all the business cards. We normalized down to a title of like, you're a lead of what? And the longer that is behind lead is probably the farther down you are in the organization. And we've kept it. Like, we, you know, we don't have titles.

[00:29:30.730 --> 00:29:59.770] We have like, you know, what do you lead? Going back to like the DRI thing, what are you ultimately responsible for? And I think it's helped us a lot. But this is another step. Like, if you're starting today or you're 100 today, like, what is actually fundamental to solving your customers' problems? And where is the hierarchy getting in the way of that? And look at all the tools you're using. Like, look at all the information you're generating just by doing your work.

[00:30:00.290 --> 00:30:29.890] Like, just putting that into an intelligence and being able to query it will give you an understanding of the company that, like, is two to three times more than you had before, ever. Because you're relying on people telling you things. And, you know, that doesn't always happen for various reasons that, you know, Roloff spoke to in terms of agenda or politics or emotions or empathy. All these things. Imagine if your company was entirely legible. Like, entirely legible.

[00:30:30.010 --> 00:30:56.290] Every aspect of it. And we're not far off from that from a data perspective. It's putting the intelligence on top of it and making it useful and then making it proactive. Like, that's the hardest bet is, like, we can determine causal. Getting to predictability for these world models around the company and customer is still, right now, very much a research bet. But, like, it's one that, you know, it's imminently solvable.

[00:30:57.550 --> 00:31:25.750] Can you guys just take me behind the scenes? Like, Jack, this was a really bold move. You laid off 40% of your employees. Just, like, for CEOs listening, what was that debate inside? Like, how big should it be? How bold should it be? You know, Ruport's got this good line. If you're going to eat a shit sandwich, don't nibble. And you seem like you took a big bite. What was that debate behind the scenes?

[00:31:25.890 --> 00:31:54.130] And then, Roloff, like, how did he pitch it to you guys? And what was the board's reaction just, like, behind the scenes on that? Yeah. So, it was something, you know, December of last year is when the models really got a, like, noticeable upgrade from being able to be really good at building prototypes and grid field efforts to, like, understanding, like, large code bases and legacy code bases like our own.

[00:31:54.130 --> 00:32:21.470] And, like, there was, you know, hallucination wasn't much of a topic in terms of, like, the coding ability. And the tool harnesses, we became suddenly very mature, like, just in that month. And it just, like, everyone went home for the holidays and everyone played with these tools and they were surprised at how capable they were and what they could do with them.

[00:32:21.570 --> 00:32:41.550] And, you know, we came back and the conversation was, like, just going around the table. Would you build the company this way if you had these tools today? Like, what would the company look like? And everyone around the table and my team just said, like, it would not look like this. It would not be this size. It would not be structured this way.

[00:32:41.990 --> 00:33:04.870] And we've been making, like, changes on the edge, like, you know, going from a GM structure to a functional structure to reduce, like, putting a cap on our layers to four, me plus four, and all these, like, small things. But if we were to really reboot and rebuild the company, like, would we end up where we look today? And the answer was uniformly no.

[00:33:05.770 --> 00:33:32.350] And then we just did this exercise of, like, okay, so what is the minimal number of people that we would need to keep the service up 100%? And then next, what is the minimal number of people that we would need to be, to fully be in compliance with our regulators? We're a highly regulated business, so that one's extremely important to us. And legal, obviously.

[00:33:33.470 --> 00:33:58.010] And then third, what is the minimal set of folks that we need in order to grow, to fulfill our commitments we've made to the street, but also rebuild a company as an intelligence? And that's roughly the number that we got to. And we built in some buffer in case we made mistakes, which we did. And, you know, hard not to, especially operating the way we have.

[00:33:58.150 --> 00:34:19.130] Like, I think going forward, it will be much easier because more of the company will be legible and all of our actions will be a lot more legible. So I'd have a lot more confidence going forward than not. But it was that, and that was a span of, you know, expiration to execution in, you know, under three weeks.

[00:34:19.830 --> 00:34:42.630] And I think generally, I wanted to make sure that we, if we knew that this was what our company was going to be in the future, I didn't want to have to do it with our backs against the wall. We're a public company and there's various challenges there. And other companies will probably get to this realization at some point. I don't want to react to that.

[00:34:42.730 --> 00:35:11.010] I want to be ahead of it because then we can do it with a lot more integrity. We can do it with a lot more generosity for the people that we're asking to leave and even for the people that we're asking to stay. And we're not just reacting into something mediocre. We're, you know, acting towards excellence. And like, that's just the tone that we wanted to set.

[00:35:11.250 --> 00:35:38.950] So, you know, every day it was just like constantly checking, like, are we doing the right thing? Is this the right set of folks? Like, what are we not thinking about? What are we not talking about? And we, you know, we kept the group very, very tight and had a conversation with the board, which was, my perspective, very open to it.

[00:35:39.090 --> 00:36:04.110] And actually more than open, more like, yes, we agree. Like, we should do this. But I'll let Roloff speak to that. It was a very quick process. Okay. I think part of what helps is that Jack had written us a very detailed note, laying out the logic. It's principled. It's not, as Jack was saying, it's not reactionary. It's very well laid out, very logical.

[00:36:04.830 --> 00:36:29.090] It was clear that the company and the management team was interested in a conversation about how to make this work, as opposed to being dogmatic and saying, have it all figured out. So even in the course of those three weeks, elements of this evolved. And it evolved in light of feedback from management team members and board members. You know, some of where we started in the first of those three weeks is different from where we ultimately landed by the time the announcement took place.

[00:36:30.050 --> 00:36:59.290] And I also think this is an example of where we've built enormous trust between the board and the management team. You know, we've been through a lot as a team. And so we have a lot of shorthands to be able to make crucial decisions like this. We gathered several times in quick succession to make sure we drilled in on the key issues. And the board was fully supportive. You too, Rulof, you've been on a lot of boards. Jack, you've had your ups and downs with different boards. Any advice for these CEOs listening that should they start bringing it?

[00:36:59.290 --> 00:37:26.530] A hundred employees, should they start bringing in independents? How do you build an amazing board that really serves the company well, the employees well, the investors well, the customers well? Like, what's your advice on that? I mean, early on, I always told myself and my team that like, your first board is your investors, right? Yeah. And I would treat that relationship as a hire you can never fire.

[00:37:26.710 --> 00:37:54.910] And in fact, they can fire you and have been on the other side of that. So it really puts pressure on finding the right person that you'd actually want to work with at the company, knowing that you could never fire them. And again, they can fire you. And for me, it was around, you know, I think a lot of young founders kind of go for the brand names, especially around VCs. But I always wanted to go for the person.

[00:37:55.550 --> 00:38:24.990] And, you know, that's why Rulof, you know, we were optimizing for him to be on our board and be an investor. But like, it was, it was a fact that like, he would up level our conversation, up level our execution more than anything else and challenge us along the way. So even as you think about adding independent board members, like the core function of a board is to ensure that the company has the right CEO.

[00:38:25.230 --> 00:38:49.710] Like that's their one job. They have all these committee responsibilities, but the ultimate fiduciary duty is like, do we have the right CEO going forward? And I think you have to build a board that has different perspective on that. And that is open to wild ideas, things that are going to just seem like crazy in the moment, which like this one might, might be.

[00:38:51.130 --> 00:39:17.710] But it can be rationalized if we talk through it and we like really document it and paint a picture of like where the, where this could go. And like what the opportunity cost is if we don't do something. Because like, if we didn't do something like this, I just imagine like every year it's a 10% riff or 20% riff or whatever it is. And like, that is just the most demoralizing, like crappy, like non-creative building of a company ever.

[00:39:18.450 --> 00:39:46.950] And it's all, you know, with your backs against the wall. And like, it just feels like losing constantly. And I, you know, I had a conversation with the board and I don't want that. Like, that's not, I don't want to be at a company like that. Like, it's just, it doesn't make sense. It's soul crushing, you know, and it's just not, not inspiring. And I don't feel good about it. So here's, here's what I do feel good about. And like, let's, let's go. Let's, let's challenge it.

[00:39:47.650 --> 00:40:16.450] Rulaf, you're on a lot of boards. You're on some really good ones. Advice for CEOs how to build a board? Well, I think the first financing when you get an investor, if you're getting an investor board member, you should treat it as a recruiting decision, not a financing decision. Because they'll have a much bigger bearing on the ultimate outcome of your company. And then I'm generally a fan of getting a very good independent board member within a year or two. Okay.

[00:40:16.570 --> 00:40:46.350] Certainly by the time you get product market fit. And I think there's a different relationship that the founder has with the investor board member. By virtue of what Jack, you know, described it. Sometimes, you know, that person may come to the conclusion that the founder is no longer the right person to run the company. Maybe rightly, maybe wrongly. If you can get an independent board member, there's a different relationship that the founder has with that board member. And especially if that person has previous experience, it can be a fantastic mentor relationship to help the founder on that journey,

[00:40:46.450 --> 00:41:16.110] depending obviously on their level of experience. I think boards are often built too late in a rush, especially in the run-up to an IPO where people suddenly realize, oh, I've got a four-person board and I need line or whatever the case is. And then you suddenly assemble people who have no context, they have no history, and they have no chemistry. Because you will be tested. You're going to have a situation where there's a short seller report, or you're dealing with a hostile, you know, situation with an activist investor, or a tricky financing, you know, that really tests the mettle of the team.

[00:41:16.370 --> 00:41:43.190] And you want to understand the dynamic between the board members and just their willingness to go along and their alignment with the core values of the business. And so I just think it's one of those things that requires a lot more care than I think most people apply to it. Yeah. Jack, you've started a couple great companies here. You're kind of startup founder. You're a scale-up CEO. Brian, he was the only person to have founded two companies that made it into the S&P 500. Oh, that's amazing.

[00:41:43.570 --> 00:42:13.350] And the only person to have been simultaneously CEO of two public companies. Okay, Jack. Just for the record. Which should not be a goal for anyone, by the way. That's what I recommend. He's CEO of two companies. Is it ever a good idea? Not public companies. Yeah. Private, maybe. Private, I would. I think there's probably going to be more of a trend where people are leading multiple companies that are private, but public companies, like it should be like an anti-goal.

[00:42:13.530 --> 00:42:42.830] It's an anti-pattern. What can founder CEOs learn from like, what did you do right? What did you just get wrong? What advice do you have for that 100-person company CEO? It's growing really fast. Like, yeah, what do you got? My only regrets in life and also in our businesses are where I decided not to learn something. Okay. Because I embrace all of our mistakes and all the bad decisions we made.

[00:42:42.970 --> 00:43:12.510] But if I'm not learning from that, actively learning from it, that's what I regret. And, you know, in probably the worst case in any of these companies, like just delegating way too much. Yeah. Especially within Block, because like I wanted to set a structure where we had multiple CEOs in this company, but I realized, oh man, we're just building like a holding company now. Yeah.

[00:43:12.510 --> 00:43:37.410] And like we got like, you know, the CEO over here for Square and CEO over here for Cash App. And like the value of our company is not like these, you know, unrelated things that are growing at different clips. It's how do we bring them together and like, you know, really, you know, challenge the whole financial network entirely? Because we have both sides of the counter. So like, why aren't we structured that way?

[00:43:37.410 --> 00:44:05.090] And that I think led to just very differing cultures and values and execution levels. And that was a mess. So I think the one thing that I probably consistently would have corrected would be just delegating too much, you know, too much of that. And I didn't learn that fast enough. I see.

[00:44:34.670 --> 00:45:01.670] And that's hence the shift. Like I can't imagine doing anything bigger than rebuilding our company as an intelligence or more correct, given where everything is trending. So it just it feels like I have to constantly build and constantly learn from whatever we're putting out there in order for us to stay relevant going forward.

[00:45:01.670 --> 00:45:28.910] So there's one anecdote that came up, Jack, which is how different meetings are today. There are obviously maybe you can talk about how frequent meetings are taking place now. And what's the color? What are the nature of the meetings today versus what they were a year ago? Well, I mean, just two months ago, every meeting that we would have with a company. I mean, you have this, Brian, like you see a presentation or a Google Doc and we go through it.

[00:45:29.750 --> 00:45:58.590] But now everyone is bringing a prototype that they built, which is pretty amazing. And like it's either simulated data or real data, but it's a cut on their work in a way that's far more has far more depth and realism than we could ever get from a slide deck. And because they can actually modify it in real time, like we can have a conversation around like what they're actually building in real time.

[00:46:00.050 --> 00:46:27.670] So like the breadth that we get to explore is suddenly incredible. And that allows us to like really again, it goes back to judgment, like which thread are we pulling on this now? Because we can see like everything in the horizontal. Where do we want to go like deep and like what is the right path? And the cost of like being wrong on that path and going back up the tree and going down another path is getting closer and closer to zero. Because the tools can explore the path so quickly.

[00:46:27.670 --> 00:46:54.510] And then also we can go down them much, much faster. I completely agree with you. Like a lot of times in Huskabot's history, what work was when we were doing a lot of different stuff and we were distracted. It's like, let's just get focused. And then we made progress. I see the startups these days doing more things in parallel and just being more productive and getting more done. And I used to preach focus. I don't preach it as much as I do. But do you ever either of you have a reaction to that?

[00:46:55.790 --> 00:47:24.760] Yeah, it's I think it's I think it's having a wider perspective to start. And then like because in the past, if we were to explore different paths, like it would be a, you know, three. It'd be a very costly exercise, especially within hardware, for instance. Take you a long time to build that prototype. But today we can do it in an hour. Yeah. And then so I do encourage more exploration.

[00:47:25.240 --> 00:47:50.700] But I think focus on getting the details right when we do choose that path. And like it's the 80-20% thing, which is like, you know, these tools will build about 80% of where we need to go. And then that last 20% is going to be a function of like how good our creativity, how good our taste is, how good our judgment is. Yeah. And just constantly pushing these models to doing something we didn't think they were capable of.

[00:47:50.920 --> 00:48:20.860] And that's where I think the magic still happens and where I think the focus still comes to bear. Because at the end of the day, you have to right now, you have to pick something to put out there because we do have a roadmap. But when you remove that limiting factor, as I said, and you focus on building the four things instead, like, you know, the capabilities, interface, proactive intelligence, and the world model, then, you know, it just changes everything. So I don't even know if the question matters anymore. Yeah. A lot of CEOs are struggling with the second acts.

[00:48:21.240 --> 00:48:48.500] And you've done amazing second act work at Block. You did interesting stuff with Blue Sky, interesting stuff with Spiral. Advice to CEOs trying to figure that second act out? I don't know if I ever considered it to be like a second act. It's just something that, like, we had what I wanted to do and I had to do. And it was interesting. You're building something new. It's distracting to the org. And, like, how do you resource it? Well, Cash App was like that in the early days. Yeah. Well, that's a good point.

[00:48:48.600 --> 00:49:18.180] Like, so I think every leader has to be comfortable with losing credibility with their stakeholders at some point in order to do something interesting. Like, when we had multiple moments, and these are the founding moments that I think are critical for our company. But, like, we started with a card reader. Eventually, we determined that, hey, we should probably lend money to sellers because, like, no seller wants to accept credit cards. What they want is to get more sales.

[00:49:18.420 --> 00:49:46.280] And what helps them get more sales? More capital to deploy into their business. When we first brought it to our board, our board said, absolutely no. Like, you're not getting in the lending business. Like, it's ridiculous. And I lost some credibility with, you know, the board and our population because we wanted to do this. And we kept pushing it and pushing it. And eventually, they said yes. Cash App was the same thing where we were about merchants. Our mission was make commerce easy.

[00:49:46.860 --> 00:50:16.340] And we built this thing that allowed effortless peer-to-peer. Effortless is just, you know, sending an email to start. And our COO at the time was on the founding team of PayPal, Keith Raboy. And even he said no. And he said, like, you know, this is a solved problem. Everyone in the company hated Cash App. It was a team of eight people. And hated it for two to three years.

[00:50:16.540 --> 00:50:42.020] We mentioned it less than eight times in our S1 to go public. Our investors didn't understand it at all. And every day that I allowed it to persist and defended it, I lost credibility. And I knew that I could earn it back if we saw success there. And we did. Like, we monetized it. And it became profitable. And, you know, it's now over half our business.

[00:50:42.360 --> 00:51:12.080] And so I think it's getting comfortable with, like, you're going to lose credibility. And if you have an understanding of, like, how to earn that back, it's okay. And you don't have to care about, like, what people think if you have the principle of why it's important and why this needs to exist. And you're okay with, yeah, people aren't going to trust me for a bit. And it's okay. I'm staking part of my reputation on this. And that's why I believe it. I think it makes all those answers stronger, by the way. I have a weird story for you.

[00:51:12.200 --> 00:51:41.000] When Sequoia was hiring me, they write a memo when they're investing in a company or when they're hiring someone. And the memo on me was one of my strengths was I was DGAF, don't give a flock. And one of my weaknesses was I was DGAF, I don't give a flock. You strike me as someone who has high DGAF. And you stick with your convictions for very long periods of time. Founders struggle with that. I struggle with that. Advice. Yeah.

[00:51:41.420 --> 00:52:08.900] I would say it wavers for me. Like, it's definitely, I get a lot of hate, a lot of pushback, a lot of challenges, like internally, externally. But again, it's, I made a decision some time ago. When I first became CEO of Twitter, everyone was telling me I needed a CEO coach. And I got the CEO coach and he was a great guy, but like I was learning absolutely nothing.

[00:52:09.380 --> 00:52:39.100] And it just reminded me of all these times when you put so much emphasis on like, who's my mentor? Who am I learning from? Who's my mentor? Who am I learning from? And around that time, I just decided I'm going to shift my mindset. And every single person I talk with, every single encounter I have, every single problem I face, that's my mentor. And for it to be a mentor, I have to decide that I'm going to learn something from it. Like every encounter I have is trying to teach me something.

[00:52:39.240 --> 00:53:08.760] And what am I trying to learn from it? And just, I would force myself to like write it down, like every day and every encounter. And just like, what did I learn from this? And again, my biggest regrets are when I decided not to learn something from it. Because it's likely that I would have repeated it or whatnot. So even the negative feedback or the credibility loss is a teaching moment. And it's just a decision of like, am I learning from this or not? And that allows you ownership over it. Like it just like, it gives you agency over all this stuff.

[00:53:08.900 --> 00:53:38.240] Like, what is this thing trying to tell me right now? Like, what am I ignoring? What am I being stubborn about? And, you know, sometimes I get to the right answer. Sometimes I don't. And I just like continue in my ways. And it's a failure. But I just having that mindset, instead of having this one mentor in your life, now you have infinite mentors. It's like, you know, it's just an amazing way to approach life and challenges that I find. You're definitely a learner.

[00:53:38.440 --> 00:54:07.360] I talk a lot about it on other. I've seen you talk about it a lot. You're a meditator. Should all CEOs meditate? What are the benefits you get as a CEO? And what do you take from Marc Andreessen talking about how he's very, he's not introspective? I thought that was an interesting comment. Like, talk about meditation, CEOs. What do you get from it? Yeah. Him saying that he's not introspective is very introspective. I thought that was interesting.

[00:54:07.740 --> 00:54:36.980] Just to be clear. Yeah. I don't, I didn't get a lot from that. But I do think, um, to when people think of meditation, they think of like this woo woo, like, you know, person in the desert. And, uh, I've been characterized as that and looking at the clouds and like, imagine the clouds going by and your thoughts are the clouds and, you know, make them dissipate. But if you actually get into like true meditation, it's a very physical thing. Like it's a very physical, um, practice.

[00:54:37.260 --> 00:55:02.880] And what you're doing is you're training your mind to focus on one point, one point. Like the meditation retreats I did were 10 days and you spend the first three days sitting from four 30 in the morning till 9 PM, focusing on the feeling of your breath on your upper lip, just that, and just the sensation of it. And what you're training your mind to do is to sharpen your focus and then just to observe,

[00:55:03.160 --> 00:55:29.100] observe the sensation without reacting to it from an emotional intellectual standpoint. And then the next seven days you go up and down your body and you're scanning for sensations like pain and you're sitting cross-legged and you can't move for three hours at a time. And it's super painful. And you actually observe this pain and you're just like, you're constantly with this mindset of like, this isn't permanent. If I were to stand up, it goes away.

[00:55:29.680 --> 00:55:55.060] And it's just that, that training your mind to like recognize everything is impermanent. There's no need to suffer or be attached to something that's going to go away. Like you're doing in this very small physical way, but then you apply that whole concept to your, to your whole life, every emotion or reaction or encounter you have. So I would recommend it only because it sharpens your focus.

[00:55:55.060 --> 00:56:21.780] It sharpens your power of observation and it diminishes your instinct to immediately react to things and to actually see them for what they are and then choose how you want to act with that information. So if you think about it as like a woo-woo, you know, head in the clouds, then that's what you're going to get from it. If you see it as a physical practice to make your mind stronger, you'll get that. And that's, that's what I see. And that's what you practice.

[00:56:22.980 --> 00:56:51.160] Maybe just close on and start with you, Rulaf. There's some timeless qualities of CEOs that last the test of time. And Rulaf, you're involved with YouTube, Instagram, Block, Mongo, Unity. What are timeless CEO qualities? And what is new? Like, what are the new qualities CEOs need today? I like acronyms.

[00:56:51.300 --> 00:57:21.020] So I came up with one, which is, um, ale, A-L-E, which is sort of not a very pleasant drink for most people. But anyway, um, authenticity, logic, and empathy. So authenticity, I mean, are you, you know, are you pretentious? Are you who you, do people see who you really are? Do you behave authentically? Are you logical? Are you predictable? Are you rational? Would you fly off the handle? Are you empathetic? Do you really care about the team that you manage? Do you really care about the business?

[00:57:21.220 --> 00:57:47.360] We, uh, you know, sort of the opposite of being a sociopath perhaps, but deep empathy. So I think of those three qualities, I mean, there are many more that one could list, but, you know, I think it's just hard to keep it in your mind. So for me, those are the three most important, authenticity, logic, and empathy. I think when it comes to dealing with humans, most of those things stay the same. And I remember how many of us thought the world was going to be so different in the midst of COVID.

[00:57:47.760 --> 00:58:13.540] And I listened to a talk that Steven Pinker gave, and he talked about how probably things are going to go back largely the way they were before. And I think the same is true here. Yes, companies are being built differently. Yes, AI is absolutely transformational. It's going to upend so many industries. I think it's the biggest drainer of moats companies have ever seen. But some of the, you know, basics of dealing with people and leading remain true.

[00:58:13.960 --> 00:58:43.560] The one I would say is probably different is the pace of change is so fast. And I think, you know, kudos again to Jack for the speed with which we're moving on this decision because it would have been easy to dither for six or 12 months on this decision. So you've got to move fast. Jack, thoughts on that? Like when you're, you've hired some amazing people in your career that have gone on to do some amazing stuff. What do you, what do you think? And what's changed? What's, what's timeless? What's changed?

[00:58:44.160 --> 00:59:08.080] I value someone who's able to reprogram their mind and assumptions constantly. I mean, this is stated a lot, but just being able to question your own requirements, your own assumptions and your own decisions or how rigid you are towards your past, the company's past and sacred cows or what the competition is doing.

[00:59:08.080 --> 00:59:37.260] Um, it's just, you know, being able to like go wild for a bit and then also being able to get that entire corpus down to something that's actually manageable and that can be articulated in a way that other people understand. I think that's extremely valuable. Has it been valuable or is more valuable because things are moving so fast right now? I think it's more valuable. Like being able, yeah. I mean, I think it's going to be so easy to go along with the momentum of what's happening

[00:59:37.260 --> 01:00:05.020] around us today. And it's going to be increasingly hard to break free of that momentum given where, what the tools do and like, this is the way we do things. And I think people will, um, because we're offloading some of our intelligence to intelligences and people will go along with, uh, more likely to, to default to what these things are suggesting rather than seeing them as an input.

[01:00:05.020 --> 01:00:33.460] But like, I think we're, we're still in the mode where most people are seeing what the intelligences do, these tools do as output rather than better input to create better output ourselves. And I like, I think that's important to me. Like when I was doing that, like every day, three hours, like this is input to me and it's now up to me to like really, um, make better output from like all this new input that I have and like the ability to just take all this and see it at once. It is just phenomenal.

[01:00:34.000 --> 01:01:03.900] So having someone who's able to discern signal from noise and cool from not relevant, you know, like there's, there's, this is highly overused right now, but, um, the, the taste thing is real. And it's, it's not just like, I know what things look good together. It's more like, do I have a point of view? Do I have a perspective and an opinionated drive to get it there? And is it, is it relevant?

[01:01:04.140 --> 01:01:30.700] Is it more relevant than, than, you know, what else is out there? And I think that's, that's critical. That's what any founder is doing is like, I'm building something that didn't exist in the world. Cause I wanted to see it there. And, and because it didn't exist is why I'm building it. And I think, um, right now you're seeing a lot of companies, they're just copies of copies of copies of copies because it's easy instead of like, what's your, what's your point of view? Like, what is, what is opinionated in this?

[01:01:30.820 --> 01:01:57.420] And like, where, where is it pushing the boundaries and where is it uncomfortable? Hmm. I think that's brilliant. It's a great place to end. Thank you both for coming on long, strange trip. I love the article you wrote. I think it's going to be game changing for lots of companies. Appreciate you both. Thank you. Thank you, Ryan. Thank you, Jack. Thank you. Hope you liked that. I really enjoyed speaking to him. He's an unusual homo sapien and he's got some interesting thoughts.

[01:01:58.180 --> 01:02:27.980] Um, I think his ideas on how to transform the way you build a company and rethink the hierarchy, they kind of make sense to me. And I feel like at some point in the future, it's somewhat inevitable that this kind of thing is going to happen. And I, I sort of think of it as like when I grew up in my career, I worked this company PTC in the nineties. It was very, very manager mode, uh, very hierarchical. Um, the power rested in the VPs, essentially.

[01:02:28.620 --> 01:02:53.400] Um, when I ran HubSpot, they didn't call it founder mode then, but it was kind of founder mode instead of being a pyramid, it was flat. And a lot of power was rested in the, in the founder's hands. Um, he's sort of proposing the Dorsey mode in my mind. He laughed about it when I said it, but I think of it as like, what's next? And it's more like a circle than a really flat organization.

[01:02:54.220 --> 01:03:23.240] And the power rests in the kind of in the system and the system makes a lot of decisions and can react real time to the employees and the customers. But I think of Dorsey mode as getting rid of the hierarchy altogether, building basically the brain, getting the inputs right. And having it making a lot of the decisions that the hierarchy used to. I think he's onto something. I'm curious to see what you think. Um, comment on Twitter or comment in on YouTube.

[01:03:23.460 --> 01:03:32.800] I'm, I'm curious about your thoughts on it. I think Jack would be curious too. He's in the very early innings of rolling this out and he's looking for feedback on it. Anyway, appreciate you all. Thanks for tuning in.