[00:00:00.000 --> 00:00:28.700] All of the previous revolutions in tech, internet, social media, whatever, have been totally meaningless to biotechnology and biopharma. Like, yeah, it's nice. We communicate slightly better or whatever. It's just some back office IT crap. Not this. This is actually going to change the fundamentals of how we do science and our big science industries like biopharma are going to get disrupted. I really believe that. And that's not been true for the last 30 years of tech.

[00:00:45.710 --> 00:01:14.370] We are thrilled to have Jason Kelly, founder and CEO of Ginkgo Bioworks with us today. Thank you for joining us. Yeah, thanks, Anya. So you started Ginkgo Bioworks in 2008 with the goal of making biology programmable. And programmable has taken on completely different meaning in the era of AI. So I'm very excited for the conversation today. Maybe tell us about the journey so far. I mean, I'll do the Ginkgo journey in short, right? Yeah, we started in 2008. But we didn't actually raise any capital until 2014. So we bootstrapped for four or five years.

[00:01:14.430 --> 00:01:36.190] Yeah. Which like if you're not a bioperson, this doesn't make sense. But in biotech VC, they really don't like like young people, for example. So we had started the company like straight out of grad school. It was 2008. We weren't trying to make a drug. So we were like totally uninvestable. Were you full time focused on the company for those for six years? Oh, yeah. OK. Oh, yeah. Yeah. We were basically like applying. We did government grants and service business. It was like pretty brutal start.

[00:01:36.790 --> 00:02:06.770] And then summer 14, Sam Altman, now Mr. Famous, writes this blog post because he just took over YC and he's like, hey, I think the Silicon Valley model can work for like deep tech, you know, nuclear fission, biotech, material science. And so I wrote him an email. I was like, oh, man, like, thank you for we're like five years old. I got 15 people in a lab in Boston. We don't make any sense for YC. But this is like an oasis in the desert, you know, like nobody will invest in weird companies like this. And he's like, no, you got to meet me. So I flew out to San Francisco and met him. He's like, you should do YC. I was like, I should do YC.

[00:02:07.670 --> 00:02:34.210] So then we did YC. So we kind of that was sort of when, you know, if you really want to mark Ginkgo from like having capital, it was sort of in 2014. And how's the product change since 2014? Oh, well, so the mission hasn't changed, but the product has gone all over the place, different, different roads. So we've always wanted to make biology easier to engineer. That was the idea. And so if you're, you know, this is a very much. Hang on. I remember make biology programmable. Has have the words always been make it easier to engineer? Because I feel like that's a slight. I was always talking to Sequoia.

[00:02:34.210 --> 00:03:03.430] Yeah, it was always like the computer science rapper on make biology easier to engineer. But yeah, that was always our mission. Okay, got it. But the analogy is solid, right? So, you know, DNA is code, right? It's ATCs and Gs, not zeros and ones. It's really our only other like coded product other than computers is really biotechnology. And so the core idea of Ginkgo was, well, if you could design DNA code, you can program cells to do things. And cells are, you know, they're programmable like computers, right?

[00:03:03.430 --> 00:03:24.310] But unlike computers, which just move information around, cells move Atom around. So if you can build whatever you want, that's, we think, ultimately going to be a huge market, a huge opportunity. But the challenge is our ability to program cells today is really bad. And so how could you fix that? That was the core idea behind Ginkgo. So, and how's the product itself changed over time? Yeah.

[00:03:24.450 --> 00:03:54.130] So the way we went to market it first was we're going to try to build what we called foundries, which was sort of a centralized laboratory that would kind of automate the lab work associated with doing biotech. And the reason, again, if you're a computer scientist, the way to think about this is if you want to compile and debug DNA code, that's a physical process. Yeah. Right. So you're like ATCGGG, like we have to do phosphoramidite chemistry, got to build the piece of DNA you want and then put it into a cell, grow the cell and test the cell. And that's your kind of compile debug cycle. Yeah.

[00:03:54.130 --> 00:04:22.670] Does that make sense? And so one half of what we worked on technologically was how do we make that cheaper? Right. Because if you want to get better at doing this, you've got to do more of it faster and for less expense. And then the second thing we worked on was how do you get better at your programming? In other words, like that design you choose to test in the lab, how do you improve the odds that it does what you want? So sort of like get better at designing the biology and make it cheaper to try things were like basically for the last 15 years, the twin activities.

[00:04:23.570 --> 00:04:51.550] And in an era of AI, I see you see opportunities on both sides for that today. And that's we've shifted a little bit over the years in terms of how we do it. But does that make sense that you kind of have? Yeah. And roughly speaking, the design piece sounds like it's a bit more software. The testing piece sounds like it's a bit more hardware controlled by software. Very much. Yeah, that's exactly right. And today, the folks leading on the design side, you might see companies like Chai Bio, for example, like it has like these protein models bolts.

[00:04:52.310 --> 00:05:22.310] The folks at Arc Institute just came out today with a paper we'll call it about Evo 2, which is like a genomic model. There's a whole community of people now trying to solve the problem of designing biology with AI. The big change of Gingo over the last two years is I've kind of stopped working on that problem. I'm like, we had our own approach to solving it. It's hard, right? Like designing cells is tricky. We're going to try to solve this half of the problem, which is how do you make it cheaper and faster to try things in the lab? And how can you we can talk a little bit more? We did a project with OpenAI.

[00:05:22.850 --> 00:05:44.710] How could you have AI models help you do that? Is anybody else focused on the back end, so to speak? I kind of think about design as the front end of the process and testing is the back end. And when I say anybody else, obviously people do this. Is anybody else with a similar approach focused on that part of the market? There's some new companies, right? So there's companies like Medra out here as one that's doing it with like robotic arms trying to accelerate it.

[00:05:44.890 --> 00:06:13.870] You have like the life science tools industry, but I would say it does not have a Silicon Valley attitude about things in the sense that they're not really trying to change the fundamentals of how you do it. But they're sort of like just providing the next tool to people doing it the way they've always done it. And so we've always been this kind of unique force trying to say, hey, is there a new platform? Right. Is there something like the jump to planer semiconductor manufacturing in electronics at the beginning of Intel?

[00:06:14.010 --> 00:06:43.130] You know, like, is there some some way we should just do all this stuff differently that could make it way better in the future? And that's always been the Ginkgo, like what I think is unique about what we've been doing the last 10 years. What catalyzed the focus on this part of the business? On the on this half of the house? Yeah. I think this is an engineering problem and I think this is a science problem. OK. So and I went after both initially and I kind of took my licks for that. And I think the good thing about an engineering problem is you can ultimately like render it to dust.

[00:06:43.410 --> 00:07:11.570] Right. A science problem, I think, is great if you hit it, but it's much more unpredictable. And so in this era of Ginkgo, I've got like the resources marshaled at this point to go after this and kind of see it through. And so that's why you see me pointing in that direction. And with the efforts that we see with the Ark Institute and others of that ilk, what ending are we in, so to speak? Like, is the ecosystem around the science problem going to start producing meaningful results soon other than papers? It's a good question.

[00:07:11.790 --> 00:07:38.890] I think the hard part about designing biology is amazing, by the way. Right. Like just as a substrate again. Right. Like if you think about what's happening inside of a cell, it is producing, you know, Intel or now in video TSMC level caliber atomic placement basically for free. Yeah. Right. And so it's able to do molecular assembly itself repairs itself replicate. It's like as a physical substrate. It's insane. It is the product of four billion years of evolution.

[00:07:39.450 --> 00:08:04.230] So the complexity embedded in a cell is actually a lot bigger, I think, that people like give it credit for. And so there's a march there. Now, that said, you know, all, you know, more than half your drugs today are produced by biotechnology. We cure cancer. We do this. We have huge value coming out of even with the tool, the limited tools we have today. So you don't have to solve the whole problem over here to create a lot of value. You just have to be better than how we do it today. Does that make sense?

[00:08:06.130 --> 00:08:32.610] Mm hmm. So speaking of opening I and Mr. Altman. Yeah. You recently announced a partnership research result with them. Can you say more about that? Yeah. OK, so this is this is pretty exciting. I think for the folks that are following a it's pretty neat. So basically what we did was we took our we call it an autonomous lab. Right.

[00:08:32.730 --> 00:09:02.270] And so I can talk more about this. But the short answer is if you really want to drive efficiency on the lab side, you need to get the human beings off of the lab bench. Right. So the way we do. And this is true in biotechnology is kind of true for science broadly. The way we do science today, 95 percent of science, the stuff that's not theoretical. So not that everybody's working on math. Like, let's work on Terence Tao. Let's get a Terence Tao in a box or whatever. Right. Like, you know, like the reason is you can just simulate all that stuff on a computer. Let's play chess.

[00:09:02.490 --> 00:09:23.910] You know, right. Like, yeah, no kidding. Right. But but if you look at the majority of like what we spend money on in the United States and just generally across the world in science, it's largely on experimental work. Yep. And the reason is if you want to learn something new about the world, which is what science is fundamentally, you have to go out usually and like poke it. Yeah. You have an opinion of hypothesis, but you've got to go test it to actually figure it out.

[00:09:24.010 --> 00:09:47.390] So it's experimental science that moves the needle in my view. And so the question was, could a reasoning model do the work of experimental science if you gave it a robotic lab? So that was the question. And the answer was, yeah, it's actually pretty damn good. So we did basically the way the project work was we had there's a biochemistry problem called cell free synthesis.

[00:09:47.650 --> 00:10:15.190] OK, so you take a piece of DNA, ATC, GGG. Right. If you were to put it in your cell right now, remember, like, central dogma in high school. Right. Like it's like DNA makes RNA makes a protein. Right. And so you put that DNA into a cell and it'll make a protein. Well, you can do a thing called cell free where you pop a cell open, take the guts, put it in a test tube and then add the DNA to that. And because the guts are still there, it makes the protein. So this is kind of like it's like the world's smallest 3D printer or something. Right.

[00:10:15.190 --> 00:10:43.210] OK. And so scientists use this. They try to optimize. It's very expensive usually. And so there's a paper that came out of Stanford from Mike Jewett's lab in August that set the benchmark for like how cheap people had been able to do cell free protein synthesis. And so we said, all right, let's try to optimize that with the model. And so we gave the model we did each round. We would do one hundred three eighty four well plates. OK, so each well in a plate is like a little kind of cup of liquid and you can do an experiment in there.

[00:10:43.390 --> 00:11:11.890] And so we gave it, you know, 30,000 experiments to run. And after it would run those experiments, gets the data back and designs another set. So after four rounds of that, we beat state of the art. And after six rounds, we beat it by 40 percent. And so that was a I think it's the most interesting sort of model doing experimental work result that's been shown to date by a lot. And the 40 percent was a function of what? Just faster cycle time or more intelligent experiment design?

[00:11:11.990 --> 00:11:39.390] Yeah. How did it be? Yeah. State of the art. So this is this is my point. This is, I think, my larger point about science, because I think we're going to do science differently in the future. Yeah. Based based on what I'm starting to see here. So what is the sciences do when they're doing experimental work? They're coming up with an idea and then they're trying to design an experiment to ask a question about that idea. Then they're going to run the experiment, take the data back, interpret it and then poke again based on what they learned.

[00:11:39.510 --> 00:12:09.010] And they're going to go through that process a few times to like resolve something. Oh, this is how, you know, whatever this cancer works. This is how this piece of materials, you know, works. This is this. This is that. And so that cycling is just logic. Yeah. Right. And so it doesn't require you to model biology or simulate anything. It's not that half of the house. It just requires you to be almost like a programmer. Like you need to be logical, run through a set of things, do data analysis and draw conclusions.

[00:12:09.270 --> 00:12:33.070] And so that like that's all it has to do. Does that make sense? Yeah. And so we didn't do anything other than that. OK. Right. What really let it break through wasn't that it was so smart. It was that it could run experiments. And the question was just could it design them like a scientist could? The answer was, yeah, hell yeah, I could. And so now I think that opens a real interesting question about like how we do science in the United States.

[00:12:33.470 --> 00:13:03.010] Well, and it's easy to imagine a version of the future in which the, you know, the scientific method and the design and the hypothesis testing and all that is done by reasoning models of some sort. And the actual testing is done by you go, you know, autonomous labs. Yeah. What's wrong with that vision of the future? And if and if that is the right vision of the future, how far out is it? I mean, I think this is how it's going to happen. I really do like like the I mean, I'm probably more substantially more aggro on this than like the average scientist today.

[00:13:03.550 --> 00:13:30.750] But like it's so I'll just explain like why I think if you had a heads up competition, which I want to do this. Right. So and then tell me how the average scientist would push back and say, like, no, no, no, it's not going to happen that way because. Right. So I think what the what the scientists will push back on is like this thing can just be as creative or as me or something. Right. Which I actually I I'm sympathetic to that. Yeah. I'm not saying it's going to be more creative.

[00:13:31.790 --> 00:14:01.250] I'm saying it's going to be way more creative. I'm saying you. Yeah, no, not that Silicon Valley. I live in Boston. I'm saying it. It can run a lab 24 hours a day. Yeah, it. I'll give you another example, like the way science works today is you would have a lab, you'd have a lab, I'd have a lab. We're all working on the same area. Let's say we're working on like Alzheimer's. Yeah, you have hypothesis. You have hypothesis. I have hypothesis. We each kind of pursue it. We're collecting data over the course of a year or two.

[00:14:01.490 --> 00:14:31.010] And then based on what I see at the end, I write a paper. And when it comes out in the published literature, you get to read it and you get to read it and you're all doing the same thing. So we're kind of like exchanging information every year or two. And I'm not getting to see every experiment you did, by the way. I'm getting like the distilled output of what you think you saw over two years. Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah. All right. So let's contrast that to like what I think should start to happen now based on what I saw with this open AI project. What I think should happen now is you should have a robotic lab that has every piece of equipment that we all have in our labs. So it can run any experiment you want. We can talk in a minute.

[00:14:31.150 --> 00:15:00.990] That's actually a pretty technically difficult problem, but let's just wave that away. Okay. Solved. All right. Great. So then I'm going to put a hundred AI scientists on top of this thing. Yeah. Each one is going to pursue a different hypothesis for Alzheimer's. All right. Great. And they're going to run their experiments just like you would in your lab that day. But at the end of the day, they're going to pass the data on those experiments, like what experiment they ran and the raw data that came off it to the other hundred AIs. Yep. So daily, every fucking day. Okay. And so they're going to learn from each other.

[00:15:01.110 --> 00:15:29.130] Like you're even though your hypothesis is different, we're working in the same area. Yeah. So your failed result might like, for example, say your experiment went the wrong way from your hypothesis. That data might be relevant to my hypothesis. And I would never see that normally. Does that make sense? Yep. And so that's all just chugging along. And every week it dumps, you know, a lab notebook entry or like a mini paper, like a conclusion about what the hundred of them have figured out that week that we can all read and see and use that.

[00:15:29.270 --> 00:15:44.050] We can direct. We can say this, hey, cut that line of research or whatever. And so like, that's number one, I think the information sharing and like the ability to handle like really broad context across a lot of projects for the AIs is just better than it just socially different even than how we do it today.

[00:15:44.050 --> 00:16:13.950] Does that make sense? That's unfair advantage. Number one. Yep. Okay. Unfair advantage. Number two, if you look at how we spend money in science, remember all this stuff like the NIH was like, what's up with the indirect rates at the academic universities and all this hullabaloo, right? Well, what's an indirect rate? Well, it's basically paying for manual laboratories. That's what it pays for. Okay. You've got these labs and they're there 24 seven, but they're used five days a week. Yep. Okay. They have equipment, but every lab, all three of our labs, we have same copies of the same equipment.

[00:16:14.050 --> 00:16:43.010] Yep. Because we all got to do the same work. We don't share each other's. No, no, no. I like a door in my lab. Only my lab gets to use it. Your lab uses yours. So we have all low utilization rate of our equipment. Just how it works. Okay. Right. And so you have a very inefficient, like if you look at the spending on research, and this is true, the 60 to $80 billion a year that biopharma spends or the 40 billion that NIH spends. Less than 5% is on the reagents. Everything is on overhead. It's basically overhead. The people, the regulatory, the lab space.

[00:16:44.050 --> 00:17:12.430] If you're running it efficiently, you would budget a research program at the NIH, not on indirect and heads and everything else, but just on the reagents. Because that's like the usage based pricing of science. Yeah. Because to actually do experimental work, I have to consume some chemicals. I have to consume a piece of plastic plateware, like whatever the hell it is. Like I'm actually doing atoms in the physical world. I got to burn some stuff up. That should be the dominant cost. It's the opposite right now. Yes.

[00:17:12.590 --> 00:17:40.470] It's like less than 5%. So the other advantage those AI will have is if they're able to run robotic labs, now they're running where 90% of the cost of a research project goes to the reagents. Yes. Oh my God. Right. So that's like a 10X increase in the amount of data per dollar that you're getting compared to how we do it today. Yeah. So I think you combine those two things, but without the AI is even being smarter, right? They can even be dumber than the scientists. I think they win. I really think they win. And so I think we got to reevaluate like how we fund what we fund with the NIH.

[00:17:40.470 --> 00:17:51.430] I think every biopharma head of R&D needs to care about this. And like, and I think there's a blind spot, by the way, like we did YC. I know all the tech people. I've always been adjacent to this stuff, right?

[00:17:51.430 --> 00:18:20.710] All of the previous revolutions in tech, internet, right? Like social media, like whatever have been totally meaningless to biotechnology and biopharma. Like, yeah, it's nice. We communicate slightly better or whatever. It's just some like back office IT crap, right? Like not this, but like this, this is, is actually going to change the fundamentals of how we do science and, and our big science industries like biopharma are going to get disrupted. I really believe that. And that's not been true for the last 30 years of tech.

[00:18:21.090 --> 00:18:46.010] Our partner, Constantine has a good framework for that. He talks about how there are revolutions in computation and revolutions in communication. Yes. Communication is about the distribution of information. Computation is about the processing of information. Yes. And what you're talking about here is just a different way to process the information. Like that. And so the last several revolutions have been about the distribution side of the equation, which doesn't get to the core of what it is you're doing. Completely agree. And that's, I think, fundamentally true.

[00:18:46.010 --> 00:19:15.510] And so, again, I think the leaders of biopharma companies and the, and also the leaders of research universities and these people that are in the business of doing science to produce either products or for the government. Yeah. Cannot ignore this. They cannot ignore AI. It is, it is just different. Yeah. And I am, I'm telling you, I'm a person who has been adjacent to this crap for 15, 20 years now. And this is the first time I've like, the tech guys finally did something cool. Yeah. And just so you understand, like, so you think AI is the catalyzing force behind, you know, cloud labs should be a thing.

[00:19:16.050 --> 00:19:45.970] Nobody really ever moved to them, but like AI will be the reason they move. Yeah. Well, we can talk about cloud labs. Yeah. So let's talk about autonomous labs and then I'll explain the cloud. Okay. So why has it been hard, right? Like, like the average tech person's look at how science is done where you have literally PhD trained people. These are brilliant people. Yeah. Paid decent amount of money standing. I did a PhD at MIT in bioengineering. It's five years of moving liquids around the lab bench by hand. I swear to God. Like, like it is like, like, like my friends from undergrad just were like, they would never, right?

[00:19:46.070 --> 00:20:14.430] Like, you know, right. Like it's ridiculous. You would do like manual labor, right? Like absurdity, right? But like, that's what you have to, you have to do that. If you want to play at the edge of science, you got to do physical work. And so that's what you learn to do. Okay. And so it's like, well, everyone in Silicon Valley is like, we'll just automate it, bro. Like, you know, like, like, why don't we just do that? Okay. So why is it, why is it hard? All right. And the reason it's hard is it's like the technical, like automation term is like high mix, low volume work. Yeah.

[00:20:14.750 --> 00:20:44.190] Okay. And this is true at like places like Hadrian today, for example, that are working on this on the manufacturing. Side industrial high mix, low volume is hard to automate. Yep. Historically. All right. And my like transportation analogy that I've been giving to people in bio is like, okay, so imagine on the Y axis, you have like level of automation. Yep. And then on the X axis, okay, you have like flexibility, like that variability, the mix and what you're being, you're asking it to do. So in transportation, low mix, high automation, that's like a subway.

[00:20:45.130 --> 00:21:13.570] Sit down, takes you away, right? Like, you know, maybe you're like, I don't have to do anything, but you got to want to go to one of the stops on that subway line. Yep. Low automation, high variability. That's car. Yep. Right. Hands on the wheel, foot on the pedal, take you right to your house or the grocery store. And that's what the transportation system looked like for the last hundred years until, thank you very much, you know, Google. We got Waymo up here in the corner where you get the flexibility, you know, the automation of a subway, but the flexibility of a car. Okay.

[00:21:13.850 --> 00:21:39.150] And it's so surprising that we don't even call it automation anymore. We make up a new word. We call it autonomous, autonomous car, because the way I look at it is since the industrial revolution, we've basically been automating everything that is low mix. That's like low variable from the loom on. Okay. Right. And we just hit a wall and AI, we hit a wall on flexibility of what you can do. And AI pushes us past it. Yep.

[00:21:39.710 --> 00:22:06.390] So that is like every part of the physical, like our physical infrastructure post-industrial revolution. Everything has to get looked at again with that lens as we move up the variability. Does that make sense? Yeah. And so that's what we're, so like that's the tricky bit in like lab land. We actually have automation, but it's like subways. Yes. It's just repeat the same experiment, you know, at a diagnostic company like Quest, they would have automation. If you're a high throughput screening in pharma, there's automation, but it can't do the variability.

[00:22:06.390 --> 00:22:28.870] So 99% of the work, just like 99% of miles traveled is in cars. 99% of the lab work is still at the fricking bench. Yeah. And that's what you got to fix. And what's, and so like the Waymo analogy is an interesting one because it's now such a magical thing that so many people have gotten to experience. Yes. And in that case, you know, you kind of had your sensor suite, you know, you have your radar and your LIDAR and your cameras. Yeah.

[00:22:28.990 --> 00:22:56.310] You know, then you had your software suite with the perception and the planning and the actuation, which then had to tie back into, you know, whatever vehicle manufacturer you're working with. And then there are gazillion corner cases that you have to simulate because you can't get enough of them in the real world. Like, what would that set of words be for your world? Like, what are all of these specific things that are hard to get right? A hundred percent. And I think if you're like trying to generalize the problem of bringing automation to autonomy. Yeah. It's going to be different in every domain. Yeah.

[00:22:56.370 --> 00:23:22.750] So for cars, the hard part is the physical world is changing. Yeah. Every mile you drive the world. Oh my God, I'm in a new place. Right. Like this one has a cone. It's raining. Like whatever. Right. Like that's not the problem in the lab at all. Yeah. Lab. I can make it. It's my lab every day. It's the same fucking room that the robots are in. Nothing is changing. Okay. The physical environment is not changing at all. Yeah. So like it is not at all the same stack that brought you autonomous cars that will bring you autonomous labs. That's not my problem. Okay.

[00:23:22.870 --> 00:23:51.890] So, so in my world, it's the variability in like what the scientist is asking for that makes it hard. Right. So they're like, I want to use this piece of equipment. I want to use that piece of equipment. This is my combination of things. Right. Right. And so one of your big problems is getting a thousand long tail pieces of third party. Like you can't believe the software on these things. Benchtop lab equipment. Okay. Integrated into one big system. Okay. So that they all can be controlled by your software. That's like problem number one.

[00:23:52.010 --> 00:24:20.950] It's like integration of benchtop equipment. Problem number two. What are we doing with our hands when we do science? Largely in bio anyway, it's liquid handling. Hmm. So you pick up a pipette, which is like, if you didn't do this in high school, it's like the world's fanciest straw and you like suck up a little bit of liquid and you squirt it out in the right spot. And like, but the thing is, if the liquid is viscous, like it's like syrup, then if you naturally with your thumb, like adjust the pressure of the straw, cause you can see with your eye if it's working or not.

[00:24:21.150 --> 00:24:51.030] So it's actually liquid handling turns out to be a trickier, like problem than you think. And you are doing some work as the human to like manage that. So you have two big buckets, one solve liquid handling to send samples to a thousand different pieces of equipment. Does that make sense? Yep. If you nail those two, you're done. Well, that sounds tractable. It is tractable. Yeah, I agree. Yeah, it's totally tractable. And so it's just a lot of work. Where are you guys in like working through that? I think we basically have it working.

[00:24:51.450 --> 00:25:18.010] Yeah, that's the honest truth. I mean, we basically. What's the last like major hurdle? One reason it's hard for people to do this technically is they want to build the hardware. Yeah. But they don't do research. So they kind of have to go to a customer and be like, hey, you want to use my robot? That's where it's like, no. Right. Like they're at the bench. They're like, no, I don't want to try. You're like. So there's like an adoption issue that I think has made it really hard. And so we have this advantage that because we have a research.

[00:25:18.250 --> 00:25:45.610] We saw like our original business, which was research partnerships, which you still do. It means I have a bunch of scientists employed at Gingo. These scientists are basically like remember the Google engineers that like sit with their hands like this next to the wheel five, seven years ago in Palo Alto, like grabbing it if it like the Waymo drove into a mailbox or something. Right. Like, yeah, that's my scientist today. Yeah. So they are. They're dog fooding on our. We have like 50 robots. We're going to 100 in our big lab in Boston. And so they're the ones like trying out and breaking it. Things that have broken.

[00:25:46.810 --> 00:26:14.870] Running a bunch of work in parallel across that system is a scheduling challenge. So, you know, you have to be able to manage all that. So like just handling the scheduling with tight timing on experiments is like algorithmically tricky. And we've had to figure out a bunch of stuff. Getting the equipment to work all like when it works all day long, making that reliable compared to it's being barely used at the lab bench. That's tricky. Right. So it's just these like things that we have to keep knocking down. But they're they're engineering at this point. Have you solved like pipetting and handling? Yeah.

[00:26:14.990 --> 00:26:44.870] The good thing is there's there is a whole industry that's worked on that problem, like liquid handling robotics. It's just a matter of having like all the different liquid handlers. And if you have them all, you can kind of and you know, you're your liquid class you're dealing with. You can manage it. Oh, one other one. Big one. Scientists don't code. Yep. OK, so. Oh, cool. Use my robot. This is what everybody's done. They've made like visual programming languages. Like if you're a scientist, there's a thing called lab view. It's like complete trash. But like it's, you know, make a flow chart.

[00:26:45.270 --> 00:27:14.610] Right. Because you can't write Python or whatever. Horrible. OK, like even that they hate. OK, right. And so no one will program shit. And so we ran into this issue where we now have all these scientists using the automation directly. So like, I don't know, three weeks ago or something, we had two, two instances where we sent a plate. So like, again, this is like kind of a bunch of little wells with liquids in them. And they and we seal the plate when we put it in storage so it doesn't evaporate. So they sent a sealed plate to the pipetting robot and pipette comes down and it gets stuck in the seal.

[00:27:14.730 --> 00:27:43.110] You're like and people on our slack are like, hey, what the hell? You know, like do you seal the plate before you send it to the liquid handler? Dumb, dumb. Right. Like, you know, and it's like and this is horrible for a scientist who has basically an expert at liquid handling at the bench. And now they're like making like, you know, basic mistakes here and they feel horrible. That's a bad UI. OK. And I was just like, this is nonsense. We're from now on only what the way we're going to interact with writing the code is through cloud code or codex. Yeah. Like you will now submit a written protocol, what you want and the model will figure it out.

[00:27:43.210 --> 00:28:10.710] And if the model sends a plate sealed, we will update the skills file and it will never do it again. And we will get through this. OK. And so that is a big win for usability. Yes. Of robotics for scientists is what's happening with with cloud code and codex. Does that make sense? That does make sense. So like, thank you. You know, right. Like, so these are the things that that's like that had to get knocked down, too. And so all this is in flight. But like right now in Boston is like a very unique experience experiment happening where we

[00:28:10.710 --> 00:28:37.350] have like 50 scientists submitting jobs into one big robotic setup that exists nowhere else on the planet right now. And so it's pretty neat to watch it. Do you see a future for humanoids? No. Really? In the lab? Because the best argument I've heard for humanoids is like the world, the physical world is designed for them. Right. And like I would think that existing labs are made for like humans walking around by petting things, walking between different machines. Yeah. And so you could you try to create a robotic arm that's able to like, you know, orchestrate

[00:28:37.350 --> 00:29:04.070] all this or you just have a humanoid do what a human lab scientist does. Yeah. So again, the primary thing that the human is doing is moving samples around the environment. Yeah. There are much better ways to do that than like walk them bipedally among things. You just put them on a track like our system has like a nice little track and the plates move with extremely high liability. They get delivered with micron specificity to where they are.

[00:29:04.070 --> 00:29:29.190] the arm picks them up it's like you know that problem just disappears okay and then the other reason is in the long run the humans are the limitation yeah right it's not like oh is our our humanoid robots going to disrupt tsmc are they going to go in there and etch the the fucking chips like obviously not you know right like yeah like no it's a microscopic discipline like biology is a microscopic discipline like these things are no yeah makes no sense yeah

[00:29:29.190 --> 00:29:59.170] does how does it change the unit of scale for a lab like i'm imagining that labs in the future are going to be these enormous things the way the data centers have become these enormous things so it's actually going to make them smaller really okay yeah because again you've probably not seen this but like if you were to walk through merc's campus you'll see a million square feet of laboratory benches yeah across a bunch of different buildings everywhere whatever right and they're they're set up for basically humans to be able to walk in and find a piece of a

[00:29:59.170 --> 00:30:27.930] equipment again underutilized but basically available whenever they need it to run whatever experiment they've come up with by thinking over the last two weeks and not even working in the lab and so like that kind of like cycling is is kind of how it operates and you need it local like if you have a team now in this new place because you bought this company they need a lab so you replicate another lab right the labs have to go wherever your scientists are well that's now instead imagine the scientists are ordering all their experimental work through computers and it's going to some

[00:30:27.930 --> 00:30:55.030] centralized autonomous lab you think of that like a local cloud if you want okay well now you don't need a lab where the scientists are so you get rid of all the just duplication that you have because of physical people you also get wildly better utilization of the benchtop equipment like we're talking going from like sub 20 utilization at the bench to like 70 so now you need less equipment and then assuming you didn't decide to have humanoids uh like you can just jam it all in around a

[00:30:55.030 --> 00:31:22.030] track system so it's actually a lot tighter yeah yeah so we have like a major space reduction at the moment that's one of the big savings like when we talked to like we just sold 97 robots to the department of energy for this like genesis mission this is like the ai for science thing that uh trump's doing and like that is basically going to be ultimately much more dense than the equivalent set of labs would have been that would have like housed that otherwise and that's part of the sales pitch it's like you could have less spending remember i told you earlier like the spending is not on

[00:31:22.030 --> 00:31:47.510] reagents it's on basically like roof space yeah like laboratory space and and people what is the unit of work you said you sold 97 robots is that 97 boxes that yeah so our our particular device we call it a rack it's like a reconfigurable automation cart it's basically like a box that has a piece of benchtop equipment in it a six axis robotic arm this is like nothing special for labs this is like tradition this is like coming out of manufacturing tech and then a piece of maglev track and what you do

[00:31:47.510 --> 00:32:17.510] is you lego block the carts so we have like 50 of them all together in our lab in boston and then a sample can move on the track and in front of every piece of equipment is an arm and the arm picks it up and puts it on the equipment okay does that make sense yeah yeah and so our unit is we sell the box we sell like a subscription basically like service fee plus um software subscription for per box yep uh and then eventually what i want to sell is like automation friendly reagents yeah uh because that's kind of like the usage pricing so that that would be my that's like one half of my business now is like

[00:32:17.510 --> 00:32:42.090] i'll build you an autonomous lab you know pacific northwest natural lab doe or berk or whoever yeah that makes sense and then the other half is what you said i'll run my lab in boston as a cloud and you can just order for it yeah totally can we talk about training like a lot of what we've been talking about to me seems like inference like it's a it's a use case of the reasoning it seems to me that you have you are generating an enormously helpful data set here that should be used to like back prop into the

[00:32:42.090 --> 00:33:09.730] weights themselves yeah how's that gonna play out uh that's a good question um i don't know yet i think i think there'll be one training so there's two different levels of challenges one was the thing i mentioned earlier like you're submitting uh a piece of physical work and again i think this applies to labs this will also apply in like light manufacturing right like you want to do a slight oh you're like a prototyping shop or whatever any place where there's like variability okay and so i see a lot of

[00:33:09.730 --> 00:33:36.170] variable requests from scientists i see all the edge cases of how it breaks the physical equipment yeah that you can't like compile out yep oh make a digital twin no like you know right like like you have to like actually do this stuff like i do not think like i like i don't buy it right like like a lot of it's edge casey you know liquid classes you can't really pick it up on a camera there's just like all this stuff yep that are like the edge cases that waymo had to see driving around are edge cases we

[00:33:36.170 --> 00:34:05.630] see by doing a lot of variable work on the same system that is one type of training i don't know that it's fully like model training as much as it probably is just like a giant file or something but like that's one does that make sense yep the bigger one is sort of the model's ability to take your intent and turn it into an experimental plan and that's interesting that's back to like could these things just like blow science out of the water and and and that i think you could have a really cool loop that has more to do with the results of every experiment like this open ai project like

[00:34:05.630 --> 00:34:29.290] as we saw what experiments worked and didn't you could theoretically then teach the son the model to be a better scientist it's like newton einstein like you know like these are the people that moved the species forward at the end of the day right like everything else is kind of noise like we're just running around circles you know like the romans did it you know right like we're just doing the same stuff right the the greeks but but except for science right does that make sense and so i do think

[00:34:29.290 --> 00:34:56.370] this is like if you crack that nut like if you can if models plus again i think you've got to have the experimental work if that really 10x or 100x is the speed we do scientific discovery like that 10x or 100x is the progress of the species in my yeah it just seems to me that the results of what you're generating in the lab need to feed back into updating the model weights somehow otherwise we're not going to get to that point i agree but i think that's totally doable like i think that

[00:34:56.370 --> 00:35:22.930] that loop and i i think this is something that the frontier models are starting to care about like like getting better at that i i do think is is again in my view some of the most important part of human intelligence is our ability to push the frontier of knowledge i mean spreadsheets are cool too you know right like doing back office for a dentist also fine you know right like you can make money with that but like if we're really want them to be smart yeah this is this is where it matters

[00:35:22.930 --> 00:35:52.810] the most i agree you mentioned project genesis uh earlier yeah what is it why does it matter yeah so this is came out of uh uh white house and ostp so the office of science and technology policy like mike kratzio is there and um and so and it's run by the department of energy and that's in part because like the department of energy is and if you're a science nerd that's where we do like our big science projects okay so like starting with the manhattan project but also like the human genome project actually was like a department of energy project okay so when it's like project based it

[00:35:52.810 --> 00:36:19.710] kind of tends to live in department of energy and like more open-ended science is like the national science foundation okay so doe is running it so it's a project and so they're like all right great we're gonna have a list and they actually put out a list of like these are areas where we would like to see breakthroughs that are relevant for the american public yep okay and one of them's you know a couple of them are bio related but there's other stuff too material science new energy all these different things right and then what we want to do is bring ai models into the national labs

[00:36:19.710 --> 00:36:49.170] which is where we do a lot of our big science in the country and accelerate them and their target is to double the acceleration of science in the next few years all right so that's the idea and so one way you're going to do it is they want to take the existing data that is at the national labs and like basically feed it into models and see if you can find new stuff from data we've already collected but then the other way they want to do it is to have autonomous labs that can generate new data in the direction of models and that was and so when we we did that deal with the department of energy

[00:36:49.170 --> 00:37:18.530] uh secretary the department of energy secretary wright and i like ribbon cut the first 18 robots up in washington and he like signed it it was really cool and so like i think that's a to me again as a science nerd like that's a good push for us um and i think you want to see some good results soon because ultimately they gotta you know congress has to get excited about this you'll need like a bigger bolus of money in the future right to really make it a big deal but i like what they're doing like in the dream scenario what does that do for america so i i chaired this um national

[00:37:18.530 --> 00:37:45.090] security commission on emerging biotech in dc for like two years and senator young indiana chairs it now and there's a similar one on ai that eric schmidt chaired like seven years ago so it's super fascinating to see like and like learn more about dc number one congress and but also like the point is how does the us stay competitive in technology areas that are strategic yep and so there's one for cyber like 15 years ago or something there was ai and then this was on on bioengineering biotech

[00:37:46.570 --> 00:38:15.870] we have had an unfair advantage like since the soviet union fell basically where like we were automatically at the lead in science like there was no one else that had the money to spend on science basically and because science is like it's not just spending on the science what would you you also need scientists so you have to have research universities to train these people like it is esoteric so that was true that was true and now with china's rise it's not true anymore right like

[00:38:15.870 --> 00:38:39.110] they're actually like if you look at the number of like scientific papers published it's more from china now if you look at in my world like biotech drugs not manufacturing drugs like making new drugs the way it works and that's in our industry is like a startup discovers a drug and then they try to sell it to merck or pfizer and they're they're they kind of go to market channel and merck or pfizer buys it for 2 billion or 5 billion or 10 billion depending on where it is in like

[00:38:39.110 --> 00:39:04.250] clinical trials yep great three years ago less than five percent from china last quarter 40 plus okay yeah so we and that's innovation that's like discovery right so we're and why is it why are why are there why is that growing so fast in china they have just as many scientists as us they're just as smart as our scientists they get paid less and remember it's like a hands in the lab you got to do

[00:39:04.250 --> 00:39:32.390] science is driven by experimental work so if you now have more experimentalists in china and you get more research per dollar i don't see why they don't win in research yeah and so so from my standpoint we need to we need to make this change both in how we do experimental work and bring in like the ai's to just increase our amount of like intellectual horsepower if we're going to keep up in science and you don't want to be surprised right like if you know like darpa like the you know like yeah

[00:39:32.390 --> 00:40:00.510] thanks for the internet darpa right like the founding point of darpa was like after sputnik when the russians like were the first ones to put a satellite up and it was created to say like we will not be technologically surprised again it's behind the scenes thing but it is very important right it's really scary if you get technologically surprised and so i think that that is why it's i think important from a national security standpoint important for the country important for the species is to is the rate at which we get scientific discovery does that make sense yep

[00:40:01.650 --> 00:40:26.450] other thing i'm curious i want to ask you guys about i mean god bless sam and this freaking open eye thing but like you know when they started that it was like a pie in the sky research project yeah yeah right this is like almost like bell labsy kind of you know like whatever like go for it everyone's like it's bullshit oh what is this non-profit okay but here we go it's now worth what what was the last round done at half a trillion something great 830 billion all right so so

[00:40:26.450 --> 00:40:53.290] i i to me it signals um in fundamental research in industry can be valuable yep and i think that's also a thing that we've kind of forgot about over the last 30 40 years because so much of like where the money was was just like engineering engineering engineering and it wasn't really about trying something that was just like this is probably not gonna work but we should give it a try

[00:40:53.850 --> 00:41:21.070] pharma's been like that but lots of the rest of the economy has not does that make sense yep and i wonder if that's going to change like i'm curious if you think like i don't know every big industry like can't you know the chemical industry like should everyone just get that be like well based on these models and like some acceleration in science like actually the most valuable thing dow chemical would do would be some fucking crazy breakthrough not uh you know let's do another chemical plant or

[00:41:21.070 --> 00:41:46.170] run the numbers on like putting something in louisiana but like you know like but like actually no no we're gonna like go for it you see that at all like you know like like do you like like do you like you know i don't know but but that would be like one of my naive hopes is the industrial side of the house wakes back up yeah on doing research yeah sonny i know you have a point of view on this i would say we've seen a few of these i mean you mentioned chai earlier yeah i think it's likely to come from

[00:41:46.170 --> 00:42:15.810] researchers on the research side of the house that are you know fundamentally rethinking for example the protein design uh process um i think it's my my gut instinct is more likely to come from folks like that who are just taking really big swings um and the tricky thing is just the the song and dance of how they get funded especially through we're still in biotech winter sure right and like how do they even prove out to the world that like hey we have better discovery engines we have we have better candidates because i think if there's like a real problem in the biotech world is asymmetric information and

[00:42:15.810 --> 00:42:42.990] you're just like you can't tell yeah um it feels google with isomorphic feels like the closest because it's actually got deep pockets behind it yeah um to actually prove that story out but yeah my bet would be a vertically integrated research team um taking big swings yeah yeah the challenge is like funding these companies all the way through well i think um to the point on should there be more breakthroughs more fundamental research i think the answer is unequivocally yes like that is one of the wonderful

[00:42:42.990 --> 00:43:10.890] dividends so to speak that's going to come out of this whole ai wave yeah and i think phase one is sort of becoming human level intelligent across a bunch of different categories and i think that will largely go to just doing the things that we do today better faster cheaper i think phase two is going to be becoming super intelligent across specific categories one at a time yeah and that's where all the breakthroughs are going to come from yeah and i feel like we're kind of in this transition

[00:43:10.890 --> 00:43:40.350] phase where we're getting to the point of human level intelligence across a bunch of different things yeah we're about to start being super intelligent in a bunch of different things yeah and we're about to start seeing a bunch of breakthroughs yeah and so i i think it's like we're within months or years of it becoming really interesting let me give an example we just backed this team that uh did the alpha chip project at google so uh they just like they're using ai systems to actually just design chips that perform better than what human chip designers can do and so like i think we're

[00:43:40.350 --> 00:44:06.870] going to see these pockets of super intelligence in different corners of industry and there's what was the alpha go move 38 or whatever 37 37 i always forget the number i know i thought it was like 83 yeah 37 great yes like move 37 right yes like that kind of stuff yeah yeah i mean if that's true right like and i think there's two ways to get at it by the way yeah my secret on this would be one is the thing you're saying like it's going to be super intelligence yeah right it'll intuit something

[00:44:06.870 --> 00:44:34.230] that a person wouldn't have and then like i really think if you can solve the problem of greatly accelerating the experimental work it's almost the same yeah the combinatoric approach it's just you know like that you can't something's a lot of the the physical world stuff is not simulatable yeah right and so the it's just can you run that machine faster and importantly like you're saying like can you feed it back and make it smarter based on what it's actually seeing in the

[00:44:34.230 --> 00:45:02.190] world and then okay like and then and then i think you if you're if you start to believe you can get those breakthroughs i do think you have to ask what's the how do you commercial like what's venture look like in that scenario right because you're like oh crazy i got this insane break you know we got a room temperature semiconductor right or you know right like now what right and is it like you go to uh you go to the big guys you do it yourself right like there's a whole thing there i think it's fascinating yeah we we had this conversation the other day on will the venture capital industry

[00:45:02.190 --> 00:45:28.490] shrink because the cost of producing everything gets cheaper because it becomes so much more efficient yeah and if we analogize back to the cloud transition when all of a sudden you didn't have to build your own data centers you could just spin up a cloud service yeah you might have thought the same thing would happen but actually the opposite happened there was this explosion in creation which made distribution that much more competitive yeah and so there were a million different

[00:45:28.490 --> 00:45:52.910] companies but then all of them had to fight so hard to like break through the noise yeah and i would i would i would guess the same thing happens which is the cost of creation goes down and down and down yeah the cost of distribution goes up because there are just so many different things out there that's interesting yeah that could be right yeah do you think language-based foundation models are the right substrates or do you think something's gonna train like a you know actg native model yeah so so

[00:45:52.910 --> 00:46:21.730] that is like the arcs evo is an actg native model yeah right so it's trained on a trillion bases of dna and and i think that's awesome right i think it's super exciting i think it will apply it'll be like a tool available to the reasoning model to do its job yeah that's already the case yep right like the reasoning model working on say our even our open eye project could go access alpha fold design a protein get it synthesized as add that as a reagent into the project like that's allowable yeah right

[00:46:21.730 --> 00:46:49.510] and so i think those will end up being powerful tools um but i still think i'm i think the reasoning models are really they can do the job of an experimental scientist and so now we have like a thousand experimental scientists in a box yeah that that's already true i don't need like a miracle right like that's um and and yeah so here's the question yeah alpha fold all these all these papers have come out on how ai is changing drug discovery yeah do you think the pace of drug discovery is

[00:46:49.510 --> 00:47:16.850] actually accelerated or not okay yeah so let's nerd out now on like what the hell you can actually do with bio which is like a pile of trash all the time right okay so so like bio is right like like i think the down so god bless like i i basically you know drastic park came out when i was 13 all i want to do in life is like make dress park engineering is awesome right like like that's why i'm doing this did you see that one company that brought back the woolly mammoth yes yeah i know them well yeah yeah yeah man over there colossal yeah it's great i love that stuff right they haven't

[00:47:16.850 --> 00:47:44.790] brought back the moly mammoth yet but they brought back a dire wolf oh a dire wolf sorry mammoth is coming so i'm sure the uh but yes okay right so but really what i'm excited about is like the ability for you know kids someday to design biology like they program computers right like that is what i want like that's the world i want to exist and so the question is like how the hell do you get there and one of the issues we have in programming biology design dna genetic

[00:47:44.790 --> 00:48:14.310] engineering whatever you want to call it is that the only working app ecosystem is therapeutics mm-hmm there is like 85 of the market for biotechnology is therapeutics and then there's like 10 is ag remember months onto right like like that's that's genetic engineering in plants and then there's like five percent that's like industrial like you and your cold water laundry detergent that's a product of biotechnology there's enzymes in there that break up dirt without you having

[00:48:14.310 --> 00:48:43.490] to make your laundry um hot and so that was the uh that's five percent okay that is the totality of apps we've come up with so far for programmable matter compilers ie cells it's embarrassing okay right like like the k the the fundamentals of this but but again like let's imagine computers the only application for computers was drug discovery we'd all be like well good they're so you know man it's such a pain in the ass with these computers right like you know and so so so there is like a

[00:48:43.490 --> 00:49:07.690] distinction between like what we're really working on at ginkgo and other places like us which is like how do you really make it easier and faster and cheaper to just design biology make it do new things yeah and then the fact of the matter being that the only apps that really like have roi are drugs yep okay and drugs have like annoying features the biggest one being like the time it takes from like

[00:49:07.690 --> 00:49:37.190] inception of the drug to making money is a killer and and it has to do with regulatory basically like it's like well we don't like to stick things in people yeah be careful like all that stuff is fine and then we can get faster on that like china's also eating our lunch yeah like you might have seen this but like they can do a trial in six months it takes us like two and a half years like like for like phase one it's crazy australia is actually eating our lunch i think our fda will just match australia soon which is great so so we will get faster but it's still not like launching a phone app okay and so

[00:49:37.190 --> 00:50:04.430] that does that make sense yeah so that does remain like like a problem i would say uh we try there's been a bunch of other attempts at other things you know like animal free meat like it like it's never quite been good enough to like disrupt another industry yet yeah um i would love to see that happen that would be a big accelerant not just for whatever industry but ultimately for genetic engineering and then if you accelerate genetic engineering you you try to create that flywheel that we got in

[00:50:04.430 --> 00:50:33.850] computers where it keeps going going now that said it to pick our app of drugs it has gotten more expensive to develop drugs not less year over year for the last 25 years so that's not great that's the opposite of what should be happening right and so and why is that because we do it manually that's my opinion we have we have not like and it's like baumau's cost disease or whatever like the scientists are getting more expensive the rent is getting more expensive that's it they're actually more

[00:50:33.850 --> 00:50:58.910] productive like we give them new tools like we are getting like slightly better but the majority of the cost is manual work yeah that does not get cheaper and so so that is what i think is the root of it actually and that's why you see me 15 years into this being like retrenching to solve that problem first because i don't believe we really get out of the mud until we've got the people out of the lab

[00:50:59.450 --> 00:51:24.310] then from that base we can start to climb out yeah right now it's fully automated you can do all kinds of crazy stuff and eventually it looks like chips someday right it's like alien technology you know you're doing it in some way that humans never remember before chips was vacuum tubes it was like human scale electronics yeah yeah and then we we were like okay cool like let's get you know we we saw the curve that will happen for lab work and genetic engineering i promise you but the first step is

[00:51:24.310 --> 00:51:53.750] like put down the vacuum tubes right like get onto some system that does not need people in the middle does that make sense how does the application space change uh so i don't know that's very unpredictable um well i'll tell you some things i think i'm excited about in the near term um you're familiar with like the glp1 drugs yeah lily's worth close to a trillion dollars that's great like that that is in my opinion like a consumer product hmm i'm on the cliffs it's awesome it is like the best thing since the iphone you don't think about food it's like you get like

[00:51:53.750 --> 00:52:21.230] you get to spend your day thinking about work and kids whatever else you want to do you don't have to like think about oh i gotta intermittent fast through lunch or i'm gonna be obese right like you can like you can just get your willpower back it's awesome okay right awesome um but that's to me a the reason it's worth so much money is because it's not treating a disease right like the the biotech industry the therapeutics industry today is really the disease industry yeah right and how much of your life and again depends on the person but how much of your life do you have a disease

[00:52:21.230 --> 00:52:48.530] it's like a small amount of the time how much of your life do you want to like weigh 15 pounds less how much of your life do you want to sleep better how much of your life do you want to have more muscles how much of your life you want to feel better like like the applications in the consumer space yeah for biotech are bananas hmm oh it adds two years to your lifespan what's that worth like what is the value of a biotech product that adds five years to lifespan this is sequoia capital

[00:52:48.530 --> 00:53:15.270] throw a number at it depends on your customer 50 trillion like like it's infinity there there's no limit on the value of something that would like stack extra years of healthy life onto people's life like it's nuts yeah right like you know like we that's effectively what our healthcare system is trying to do and it's like they can like the total consumption cost of that yeah right so if you could have that in a pill and a shot so that but right now today we don't even have a good pathway to get

[00:53:15.270 --> 00:53:43.410] something like that approved right because all of the regulatory the fda and everything is is oriented around treating disease yep and this is actually where like all the people like oh maha like like i think like that that line of the maha thing which is like hey actually it's about not just about disease but about being healthy yeah when you don't have disease i i think is really good yeah like i think that's a really good thing for the industry uh and so i do think you'll see that

[00:53:43.930 --> 00:54:11.690] that set of things um happen and so that's one half it's like new drugs there and then the other one what our first investor out of yc do you know who it was our angel mr brian johnson okay back when he was like yeah yeah but he was like pudgy vc no way oh yeah of course yeah uh-huh not not like you know longevity like you know like jesus yeah back when yeah when he was like a normal person right like i got like jack he's awesome now right like the uh and so but like what he's done

[00:54:12.270 --> 00:54:38.590] what's interesting about what brian's done is he has normalized the monitoring like because i asked him i was like how are you you know like these are like all these interventions like you're uh like well you know like like brian's got a good life you know like would you be oh you're taking some random thing and trying it out like isn't that scary and he's like wow i'm monitoring all the time right so like every week he's like taking all these tests and everything else is the most measured person two million dollars a year of diagnostic stuff right like that is the other area so like

[00:54:38.590 --> 00:55:05.010] oh we all love our aura rings and everything this is pathetic okay right that's great your heart rates like it's like telling you nothing all right like like the real and i love aura by the way i've had this thing for 10 years but like the real meat of what's going on inside your body is molecular yeah so what we really should be doing is like taking a blood sample every week and giving you like a whole readout of a ton of stuff like longitudinally over time so that you can try different interventions

[00:55:05.010 --> 00:55:30.130] for you and see you how it affects you molecularly because that's what actually matters like molecularly like aging is molecular right it's not your freaking whatever the uh and so so like that whole world these stuff like functions getting going and doing quest tests like i mean my god i did it over christmas but it's like 10 vials it's like the worst experience of the entire world right like like that there's the at home stuff now too right yeah but it's but it's so early right that's my point like

[00:55:30.130 --> 00:55:57.670] so i think that line is another place that could be a big if you're asking about near-end apps yeah biotech that one yeah is the other one right and so i think i think you could see that i think you could see other things like the glimpse um those are ones i'm excited about awesome and then i'm always hopeful jurassic park something like that yes you know right like uh that they'll just be some other weird thing uh and we did just launch a cloud lab service at ginko where you can um like we have experiments as

[00:55:57.670 --> 00:56:25.590] cheap as 39 that you can just run and we don't send you anything like we won't send you a sample but we will send you back data so it's like you do the experiment we run the experiment for you you got the data back right and so my last point on this one is like i think if you like science is thought of as this very like precious genius thing but really what it is is like formalized human curiosity it's like a process by which humans of which all of us are curious about things

[00:56:26.230 --> 00:56:52.550] like do curiosity right like really try to answer our curiosity that make sense yep but i and i think everybody's curious and so i believe that if you drop the cost of like like like a lot of what blocks people from science is actually not like the esotericness of it it's in my view the lab yeah it is that that is brutal right like you don't have a it is a total gate kept like you cannot get access

[00:56:52.550 --> 00:57:19.150] to one it like almost legally you can't get access to one right like and and so there's just this whole thing and i'm like well what if that went away what if people everyday people could could order an experiment what if the model would help them design the experiment to ask a question that they have about the world would they suddenly ask questions and do these experiments would they be would everybody would millions of people want to be scientists yeah and i know that sounds like well that's nuts blah blah but like if you rewind the clock god bless silicon valley and the computer industry

[00:57:19.730 --> 00:57:48.610] to the 1960s yep when it was ibm and it was mainframes and you told people that kids would program computers yep they would say you're fucking insane and so i believe if you do manage to drop the cost and all this stuff you may have kids and everybody else wanting to just ask original scientific questions and being able to do it and that would be a cool market right like and so anyway that that all this stuff i feel is on the other side of of getting this ai for science stuff

[00:57:48.610 --> 00:57:55.730] working but i'm excited about it extremely cool vision for the future great note to end on thank you yeah very inspiring thanks for having me on