[00:00:00.000 --> 00:00:29.800] If you're lost in the woods, if you're like clenching and panicking and like, I need to get out of this woods now, it's going to be a terrible experience. But if you're instead like, I guess I'm in the woods, I don't really know where I am, but it's kind of beautiful here. I'm just going to roll around, notice things, trust that sooner level I'll end up on a path. Then that can be easier. I started indexing my diaries. What happened, I think when I did that was that I became my own audience. It's almost like a ballerina in front of a mirror. Imagine that we're moving through a giant labyrinth, a maze. It's going in like a hundred

[00:00:29.800 --> 00:00:59.720] dimensions at the same time. And inside this labyrinth, we're going to have good artworks, good essays, good startup, good research ideas somewhere in there. And our job is to take the right path through this labyrinth to find a good stuff. But I don't think we can know beforehand where in the labyrinth will the good stuff be. I guess you just have to try different parts of the labyrinth. Let's say you're trying to fit some tiles to a strange shape. And let's say you only have like square tiles and the thing you're trying to put it into is round. You're just going to put them in. You're going to make a square. You're not going to make,

[00:00:59.800 --> 00:01:27.800] it round because you can't do that. And you actually have to sort of break the tiles. And the more smaller parts you break them into, more perfectly, you're going to be able to fill that square. And I think the same is true with our mental model. But if you kind of get into that confused stick, it's like you're breaking your preexisting mental models, the tiles. You're sitting there with a mess. It's just a mess of small shards, right? And that part scares most people. And it's very overwhelming. It's like cognitively taxing to be sitting there like, oh, five minutes ago, I understood this. Now I don't understand anything.

[00:01:27.800 --> 00:01:48.120] Welcome to Dialectic episode 41 with Henrik Karlsson. Long time listeners will know this is not my first conversation with Henrik. I interviewed Henrik last spring when I was in Copenhagen and it was one of my favorite episodes. And so I had to go back for round two. Henrik is a writer. He writes full time on Substack and had gone full time fairly recently the last time I spoke with him.

[00:01:48.120 --> 00:02:14.040] This time, a number of themes that I think all circle around this idea of how you navigate using feeling and aliveness to more clarity in your life. And this can be in terms of understanding complex problems or creating entirely new things. We talk a lot about creative people, but I think this applies across any kind of problem solving. Henrik uses a number of metaphors throughout this conversation that all build on this idea of navigating through the darkness, getting through the woods,

[00:02:14.040 --> 00:02:41.260] and not being too terrified while you remain in them because you know that whatever is on the other side is worth it. Most great creatives and a number of the artists Henrik has studied, particularly by way of their private notebooks, consistently find themselves in states of confusion, having had to break down their mental models, their conceptions of what they should be doing and rebuild them from scratch. Henrik talks about an idea he calls mental proprioception or this sense of balance and feeling to know that you're doing the right thing.

[00:02:41.260 --> 00:03:05.340] You can imagine the ballet dancer watching herself in the mirror, getting a sense of her bodily intuition. And I think for any of us trying to do something risky or creative, there is an element of that to find your balance and then continue to push ahead. Towards the end of the conversation, Henrik and I talk about an idea what we struggle to put the right words to, but it's this element of being hard and soft at the same time, or maybe we land on assertiveness and receptiveness.

[00:03:05.340 --> 00:03:31.240] This idea that you can press forward while remaining open to all of the possibilities and all of the things that you may not have conceived of yet. As we did a bit in the first conversation, we talk about maybe the right kind of introspection. A framing Henrik uses that I really loved is observing yourself not as the object to be understood, but instead the subject. We talk plenty about agency and the right kind of risk taking and what it means to concentrate risk in certain areas and have far less risk in others.

[00:03:31.240 --> 00:03:57.380] So you can actually take risks on the right things and how ultimately most of us are probably still not pushing ourselves enough for what might be possible. We wrap up by discussing conviction, what Henrik believes in, and in the end, what we do with the short time we are here. This was a meaningful one to me and I hope you enjoy it. You can learn more about the episode and get links, full transcript, all of that at dialectic.fm slash Henrik dash two.

[00:03:57.380 --> 00:04:23.700] And as always, if you enjoyed the episode, please give it a review or a like, thumbs up, whatever it might be, or subscribe wherever you're watching or listening. Before we start the conversation, I'd like to thank Notion, Dialectic's presenting partner. I've been full-time on the project for a few months now thanks to their support. Notion is a creative tool for your life's work and it can be used as an individual or with teams big and small. The last year of Notion has been all about the ways they have integrated AI into how you can work.

[00:04:23.700 --> 00:04:52.320] The great thing is that Notion is already where all of your documents, tables, ideas live. Notion is tremendously thoughtful about how they integrate AI in a way that actually enables you to focus on more of the important work and delegate or automate the busy work. For me, it's really two things that I want to spend all my time on. The first is immersing myself in the minds of the people I'm going to speak to, just trying to like get inside their brain for a little bit before we talk. And the second is the actual conversation, getting to be truly present with them and explore all of the ways their mind works.

[00:04:52.320 --> 00:05:22.240] It's been amazing to see how Notion AI and agents can help me with everything on both sides of that. Custom agents, which just launched a few weeks ago, expand this even more. Essentially, you can take something really small, a simple bit of information that everyone on your team might need to query, or something large. Like, how do I end-to-end prep a dialectic episode for release? Again, I don't want to delegate the actual research, but even being able to get a primer on the first things I should know for whoever I'm going to speak to, or afterwards,

[00:05:22.380 --> 00:05:49.140] be able to speed up the process of compiling the transcript and notes and timestamps and everything else, allows me to focus on more of what really matters. Notion AI is also just an amazing way to identify patterns that come up across individual episodes, and across all of the body of work in this kind of curriculum or project I'm creating here at Dialectic. In many ways, this is an ongoing discovery of the most interesting minds I can find on the internet. And Notion is my partner along the way.

[00:05:49.300 --> 00:06:17.300] If you don't use Notion or haven't tried it in a while, you can check it out at notion.com slash dialectic. With that, here is my second conversation with Henrik Karlsson. Henrik Carlson, here we are. We're back. Yes, we are. Round two. In the flesh. Knock on wood on video. Nice to be with you. We are not in your home. I should establish right up front, so you are not obligated to any of the aesthetic choices, although I think this is a fun room to be in.

[00:06:17.620 --> 00:06:46.320] Yeah. It is. It's an old mill, and I do land in an old mill, so it's almost right. Spiritually. Wrong island or wrong landmass, but right corner of the world, so we'll take it. We're back in Copenhagen. Okay. I want to start with maybe two not obviously related ideas. You have somewhere where you say that in English, we spend attention. In Spanish, we lend attention.

[00:06:46.620 --> 00:07:10.300] And in Swedish, as I understand it, we are attention. Yeah. Yeah. Hopefully I don't have that totally wrong. Rough, at least directionally. You also tweeted recently a couple of things I liked. First, the most useful piece of writing advice you can squeeze into three words is, don't think, look. That's Wittgenstein.

[00:07:15.780 --> 00:07:28.060] And then you also wrote, this is in a piece where you're reflecting on the ways that children lose the magic, maybe. You say,

[00:07:48.600 --> 00:08:17.300] And as I reflected on your writing, you actually come back again and again to a, there might be different ways to describe it, but what I might call cultivating the feeling or experience of being bored, coming back to boredom. And maybe specifically this notion that boredom is important in developing attention. And so my slightly cheeky first question is, how does practicing boredom keep us from becoming bored?

[00:08:17.560 --> 00:08:41.140] Or excuse me, keep us from becoming boring? Yeah. Yeah. I've used that phrase, like the importance of being bored of a lot. Like right now, I saw it in your notes before. And instead of thinking about that word boring, I think it's maybe the wrong word. Yeah. Because it's, it's not, because boring might feel like you're, like it's a bad feeling.

[00:08:41.380 --> 00:09:04.160] I guess I'm saying more understimulated, that you're supposed to be not externally stimulated. Like, because if you remove external stimulations, like rewards and status and YouTube videos and anything, right? Like, that, that keeps you kind of activated. Then you will feel bored at first, perhaps.

[00:09:04.500 --> 00:09:29.240] But then eventually, then, then you will, because we're like curiosity-driven animals that have like rewards inside of us to, to seek out new stimuli. Like, we'll start to sort of generate, generate that internally. So we'll have, start to daydream or we'll start to like pay attention to the flowers around us. Or we'll be curious about it and start researching something or writing something. So I think it's a sort of question of like removing stimuli.

[00:09:30.840 --> 00:09:59.840] Sort of gives point for those kind of maybe slightly more lower tuned kind of stimuli that comes from inside to kind of bubble up. So, and why does that, or shikido is from being boring? Is because I guess, boring is in a sense being predictable maybe. Like you can, from what you've observed of me, determine what I'm going to say next. That will be boring.

[00:10:00.140 --> 00:10:26.300] The more you're steered by what comes from the outside, the more predictable you're going to be by the data from outside. And the more you're sort of generating your own decisions internally and from your own, like whatever that is. That's often source of surprise. So I think like if you attune to that and like over many years build up a rich or rich sense internally, that would be a source of surprise.

[00:10:26.300 --> 00:10:54.620] And that's why you kind of end up being more interesting if you care about that. Feels like maybe that's like the wrong way to frame it, like being not boring or interesting. Because that feels like it's for other people. I think it's like better to think about like it will make you feel more alive. Yeah. Or something like that. It's funny. I like that you've taken issue with both my uses of both being boring and boredom. It's funny.

[00:10:54.820 --> 00:11:24.120] I had a conversation. I interviewed Sian Bannister. And the first time I ever met Sian before I interviewed her, we had a conversation about boredom. And she said something along the lines of like, I never bored. Like I try never to be bored. And I was kind of debating over this because I think we were having a similar disagreement that wasn't really a disagreement to what you and I are talking about now, which is this kind of boredom that leads to all the things coming in.

[00:11:24.260 --> 00:11:50.520] It's actually more like space. Sian, and it was funny. I was reading some other writing of yours. And Sian uses this word that you also use, which is dereive. And this kind of not totally aimless, but semi-intentional drift captures a little bit of the same thing, which is like I'm calling that boredom, which is like meandering or walking or just sitting and wondering and daydreaming.

[00:11:51.480 --> 00:12:17.500] But to your point, that is actually about letting all kinds of things in that are going to surprise you or not necessarily like let you. So, but it's interesting. I loved our interview with Sian. I was, she's so interesting. She's not boring at all. I was in Spain recently with my kids and we were in Malaga.

[00:12:17.920 --> 00:12:45.360] And like the first day we were there, I had some plans because it was just me and the kids because Sian has hurt her legs. So she was in the apartment. And the day after I had to like entertain the kids in the evening again, and I didn't have any plans. And so I just told them like they were doing a dereive, right? Much better pronunciation than mine, by the way. I don't know French. I'm also big, you know.

[00:12:45.700 --> 00:13:09.620] And then like the age of us are like, oh, what's a dereive? And I said, oh, we're just going to go out from the apartment and we're going to look around and you're going to get to pick the most exciting direction we can go. And I will go like until we can't see anything more. And then we, you know, and then you decide again. And it was very interesting to notice like how alive they came when they got to do that. And it's like a labyrinth themed city.

[00:13:09.860 --> 00:13:29.980] So we're just going down these back alleys and going into like construction sites and like finding all these nooks and crannies. And it just made us so much more alive than when we were going to these more exciting places. And like instead of just like I'm going to go here, I'm going to actually like stop every few minutes. I'm like, where do I actually want to go now?

[00:13:31.720 --> 00:13:57.380] Because like, yeah, the streets we got to were probably less interesting in some objective way than like it was in any of the cool caves we went to or the beach. But we were so much more alive to those places because we were like having to attune to ourselves to like figure out what would be most interesting. So it was just you could see that you just started galloping down the street like the kids just came alive. And I felt the same that you see it in the kids more because they it's in the bodies.

[00:13:57.500 --> 00:14:23.720] But I think we all kind of have that sense of like you're talking about a dance down this week when you take that pond to like a change yourself. Yeah, it's a state of attention. I can't remember. It's possible we even spoke about this last time. But in the in the Robert Irwin biography, he and Terrell and some guy at NASA like go into the sensory deprivation room. And they sit in there for like eight hours. It's not even there's not even a water tank. It's just dark. And they sit in there for like eight hours. And they walk.

[00:14:23.920 --> 00:14:52.020] They're like prancing down the street looking at flowers basically tripping because they're just like everything is so. And I think it's pretty marvelous how even something as simple as just like, hey, kids, we're not going to wander around without a plan. We're going to derive or whatever. And like as a result, really look. It goes back to the Wittgenstein thing is maybe the painters have know it best, which is just look and really see. Look and really see. And you will be quite surprised by what is actually there.

[00:14:52.620 --> 00:15:20.380] I'd like to talk about something that you've written about in different ways quite a lot. And most recently you described it as mental proprioception. If I'm not pronouncing it incorrectly. A few lines from you. My job as an essayist consists to a large extent in putting myself in the right state for the thoughts to come out right. That's something you continue to come across, come back to over and over again, this form of exhaust.

[00:15:21.480 --> 00:15:45.880] There's a lot else happening that can distract me from my curiosity or that even worse, I can mistake for curiosity. For example, I also get another kind of positive, motivating feeling that if I observe it closely says, if I write this, my readers will be pleased. Staying fully centered in curiosity through an entire essay is perhaps as hard as feeling that you are holding your body exactly right to execute a pirouette.

[00:15:46.240 --> 00:16:09.620] I often, without noticing it, tip over into writing what is popular and then I stumble. Yeah, I wrote that maybe a month ago and I stumbled last week anyway. Because it's like, it is very, very hard to do. Because I've been struggling with my brain for the last two weeks and I was just like, why isn't it working?

[00:16:10.600 --> 00:16:36.900] And I was feeling all this resistance and it wasn't fun at all. And then like, I guess two days ago, I decided like, I'm going to put the thing I'm working on aside and which felt like a very good and important essay that I had made some good progress on. And I'm just going to work on this thing that no one cares about at all. And all of a sudden, everything came loose and that turned out very lovely. And it was just so easy.

[00:16:37.100 --> 00:17:00.420] So again, I had sort of, what I realized was that I tricked myself up and like thinking that the essay I was working on would be a big, important essay. And that was just like... The weight of it was almost... Yeah, because what I hear in this, by the way, sorry to interrupt you, is maybe I'm over focusing on the metaphor, but it's about balance. I think so. More so than even leaning one way or another way.

[00:17:02.260 --> 00:17:27.700] Yeah, it feels like, I mean, putting the weight in different parts of my body or something. It's like, it's, yeah, it's very tricky to talk about. But it sounds like almost woo when you try to talk about it. But like the felt sense of it is that like my motivation or where I'm writing from is like in some different part of my body. I'm like too low in the body or something. I don't know. Like, it's just a few heavy.

[00:17:29.180 --> 00:17:51.080] And then when I get it right, there's a certain kind of nimbleness, a certain lightness, a playfulness. But like, again, as I feel like the kids when they're galloping down the street, it's just like I get this kind of fluid movement in my body. Yeah, it's very closely related to posture and stance and like balance somehow. Yeah.

[00:17:51.080 --> 00:18:15.720] One of the things that comes up over and over, especially as you kind of seep into the ways you write about other people, is you're just kind of obsessed with this. Maybe what I would call the ways that people maybe like disassemble themselves and reassemble themselves. Another way of putting this would be to sort of lean into the confused space.

[00:18:16.440 --> 00:18:40.180] And the way that most shows up, I think, at least in the writing you like to read is these notebooks and these private writings of people who are artistic or even maybe scientific or mathematical. I know you're big on Grothendijk, Ingmar Bergman, Tarkovsky. But there are other kind of versions of this in Herzog and Nosgaard. I recently read the Steinbeck letters when he was reading East of Eden, another version of this.

[00:18:40.840 --> 00:19:04.160] You also reference Grothendijk again and Newton and Einstein as they're sort of like reinventing things that were already known. And the pattern I kind of, you call it a building up ability to perceive evolution of their own thought. But what I see this almost as, and it may be ties to some other things you've written, is like this like wading into the confused space or maybe even the unbalanced space to steal from the earlier metaphor.

[00:19:06.240 --> 00:19:35.020] I guess my question is like, what is the benefit of and why do you try to confuse yourself or move into these spaces of not totally knowing or being sure? Well, maybe I can try to get at it with sort of an image first, right? It's sort of, let's say you're trying to make like a mosaic or however you say that, like you're trying to fit some tiles to a strange shape.

[00:19:35.180 --> 00:19:59.900] And let's say you only have like square tiles and the thing you're trying to put it into is round. If you're just going to put them in, you're going to make a square. You're not going to make it round because you can't do that. And you actually have to sort of break the tiles in order to, and the more smaller parts you break them into, the more perfectly you're going to be able to fill that square. And I think the same is true with our mental models.

[00:20:00.060 --> 00:20:28.260] So we have any less mental models of all the situations and they are a little bit like square tiles sometimes. So you get the new situation and it might apply a little bit. But if you just apply it straight off, it won't fit perfectly. But if you kind of get into that confused stick, it's like you're breaking your pre-existing mental models, the tiles. And then you end up with like, you're sitting there with a mess. It's just a mess of small shards, right? You had debris. Yeah.

[00:20:28.640 --> 00:20:58.460] And that part scares most people. And it's very overwhelming. It's like cognitively taxing to be sitting there. Like five minutes ago, I understood this. Now I don't understand anything. And people try to like escape from that and like have all sorts of like inbuilt sub-desires to like reach cognitive plurals. Probably to see the world as like everything in the world is a square shape or a square frame. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's what we sort of end up doing. You have like confirmation bios.

[00:20:58.660 --> 00:21:28.660] It's like the classic sample. Like you have to go like, oh no, my square is actually correct. Like I'm just going to find things that confirm that. Or yeah, you'll get angry. There's all sorts of reactions. And also like Darwin made a marvelous observation that he said he has to write down everything that sort of disconfirms him. Everything that doesn't fit his mental models because he'll forget them. And I think that's true of all of us. I misread that when I originally read it. I didn't totally catch what that.

[00:21:28.660 --> 00:21:53.940] The importance of that is it's actually rejecting your body, your mental immune system to shy away from the things that don't fit. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Because Jordan Muses is specifically writing down the things that he doesn't like. Yes, exactly. Exactly. Because those that are like doesn't fit in that confusing. Like his mind is very good at filtering that. All their minds are very good at that. Yes. It bounces off of them. Yeah. So we have a tendency to want to protect our squares.

[00:21:53.940 --> 00:22:20.540] And like in sort of cognitive, I don't remember, but is this a character, maybe? Maybe where they do research, they talk about like knowledge shields. Like as you're going through life, you're having to construct all these mental models to navigate, to make good decisions. Right? You have to model the world in order to make good decisions. And that's costly. It like costs energy to reconstruct and make these.

[00:22:20.540 --> 00:22:49.860] So your brain is sort of incentivized to like make them only good enough. You don't want to understand and see the world correctly. You want to see it well enough that you can manage, right? And that means that at some point when they are like 95% correct or something, it's going to differ for everyone. But like when they're good enough, your brain is going to start to like filter stuff. And then you're going to like converge on a mental model, which is not the correct understanding of the situation, but it's like good enough.

[00:22:50.140 --> 00:23:19.040] And when we get to that point, you start like taking new data. Everything new that just doesn't fit just gets thrown off. And that's why it's a shield, like a knowledge shield, because it like shields you from new information. And so a lot of work when you're doing like expertise training in the military and so on is just like finding ways of like breaking these shields. Like how do you, like someone who's think they understand the situation, how do you make sure that like you break their understanding so they end up confused again?

[00:23:19.060 --> 00:23:44.960] So they end up like breaking their tiles. Because again, like to get back it off, like once you get the tiles apart, that's like the first step toward like piecing together a better one. And then you have to break it again. Well, and not only that, there's an element that I think you've written about, which is like when you're sort of sitting there and you've done the initial work, which is you've broken everything up. You briefly just spoke about this. And you're sitting there with your pile of shapeless debris.

[00:23:45.440 --> 00:24:14.900] And you're just like almost at like rock bottom of understanding. Like there's no coherence. What is it like? Maybe I'll read one more thing and then I'll ask the question I was going to ask, which is Nosgard on what he calls Sub-Bergman. He says, In order to create something, Bergman had to go sub-Bergman to the place in the mind where no name exists, where nothing is as yet nailed down, where one thing can morph into another, where boundlessness prevails.

[00:24:15.160 --> 00:24:41.200] The workbook is this place. In it, Bergman could put anything he wanted. The entries he made there could be completely inane, cringingly talentless, heartrendingly commonplace, intensely transgressive, jaw-droppingly dull. And this was in part their purpose. They had to be free of censorship, in particular self-censorship, which sought to lay down constraints on a process that needed to be wholly unconstrained.

[00:24:41.920 --> 00:25:08.700] And I know you're enamored with those in particular, as well as a number of these notebooks. What all of those seem to get at, at least the best of them, is something along these lines, which is maybe to use your metaphor. It's like the person sort of sitting with all the broken pieces. What does it look like when you've done that work to start to gradually put these pieces together and maybe still in this sort of circle?

[00:25:09.220 --> 00:25:38.260] Because that is a very cognitively uphill, emotionally uphill experience. Yeah. Well, yeah, it is. It is demanding, very demanding. I remember I, I think I, oh, you talked with Michael Nielsen, or maybe we tweeted at each other about this at some point several years ago. And, and he said something that, like, helped me understand this and, like, helped me get the right stance, so to speak, around this.

[00:25:38.400 --> 00:26:06.820] Because, because I was sort of complaining that when I was working on my essays, like, they would be good and then they would gradually sprawl. And, and then, and then at that time I would, like, be sort of afraid, like, about that and I would try to stop them. So, like, I would stop that sprawl at some point and, like, clean it up. And because I felt like if I just keep going, this is, this is going to sprawl endlessly. It's going to fall apart. And then he said, look, well, if it starts to sprawl, like, then you're halfway there, right?

[00:26:06.820 --> 00:26:34.260] And that was very important for me because I admire Michael's work a lot and to just have someone whose work I admire tell me that this thing that to you, to me, felt like everything falling apart, that I'm just wasting my wild rashers. Yeah, I'm lost in the woods. Having him say that, like, I've been through these woods many, many times and the good stuff is on the other side of it. So painful, though.

[00:26:34.260 --> 00:26:59.120] Yeah, and, and that made me like, okay, I'm going to try. And, and I think actually the one I wrote about Bergman and the Grothendijk was the first one where I was like, I'm going to go through the entire woods. And Johanna and I worked on that for, like, three months or something. It, like, ends up being a very simple piece in a way because that's, that's what's happened on the other side of it. You end up with something quite simple again, usually. Yeah, yeah. The circle is as simple as the square, perhaps.

[00:27:04.260 --> 00:27:25.400] This is obvious, but, like, I have spent pretty much getting there. And so, so there can be also temptation maybe to, like, shy away from it, from that. Like, I want to keep it complex. It looks more. But the best writing, by the way, the best writing, not always, but much of the best writing is the kind of writing you're nodding ahead saying, oh, yes, this is, but, and it can seem easy to write.

[00:27:25.500 --> 00:27:47.080] But what it's actually doing is it's sort of giving you the words for something you've kind of felt or acknowledged but didn't know how to, it's almost a version of this, I find. I find that so much of the, that's why so much simple writing can be so elegant is, and maybe you don't get quite as much credit for it because some people will be like, oh, yeah, I've been saying this, but that's, that is the work that's inside there. Yeah, exactly. Exactly.

[00:27:47.800 --> 00:28:14.520] Because I, it might be fun to, like, think about that particular essay because it actually sort of started out in some ways sounding smarter than it ended up. Because, like, my first idea for that, the draft I wrote was sort of about this idea that our identities are interfaces and, like, because interfaces are this thing that kind of an interface between you and the outer world and, like, how you arrange that interface is kind of, like, blah, blah, blah, right?

[00:28:14.520 --> 00:28:39.120] And, like, this quite complex idea and I wrote this piece about it and my wife, Johanna, she looked at it and said, well, I kind of liked that one line where you said that, like, being bored is important. And it's like, oh, then I had to throw up, like, this entire complex apparatus I had built of theory. And I just take this line and I remember feeling the path line, like, that boredom is important. Path is just so obvious, right?

[00:28:39.860 --> 00:29:08.820] And then, like, to build up from that to something deep and interesting, I had to go, like, read, like, 10,000, no, like, 1,000 pages of, like, Rothenjeks wild notes. And I had to read, like, 40 years of Bergman's notes. Like, it was an extremely long process and then kind of ended up with something that is, it's always obvious, but it was a fairly long process and ended up. Like, and yeah, so to get back to the question, I don't think we answered your question, like, with something like, like, how do you, how do you build up from that?

[00:29:09.440 --> 00:29:38.100] Yeah, when you're sitting at the bottom, it's almost like you're the kid who's broken all the Legos apart and you're sitting in your pile of broken pieces. And you're like, my feeling is, is similar to your comment about sort of feeling like you've spilled over, is that that's, like, not only cognitively wearing or a cognitive low point, but it's emotional. If you're halfway through a project, it's emotionally hard, too. I think the two things have made that easier for me over time.

[00:29:38.580 --> 00:30:07.360] Uh, cause like that project, when I was wrote that, that, and that essay is called cultivating a state of mind where new, I guess, are born, I think. And so when I wrote that, I was terror. That was like three months of a sheer terror, but like, it kind of was like this baptismal fire almost where I like, uh, I learned to write in a new way. Um, but I think the thing I did wrong there was that I had sort of the outcome in mind. I was clenching.

[00:30:07.720 --> 00:30:36.620] I was like, I wanted this to cohere to soon. If you can instead, um, it's, it's like, it's like, it's a little bit like if you're lost in the woods, if you're like clenching and panicking, I was like, I need to get out of this woods. Nah, it's going to be a terrible experience. But if you're instead like, well, I guess I'm in the woods. I don't really know where I am, but it's kind of beautiful here. I'm just going to stroll around, notice things and like trust a similar label. I'll end up on a path. Uh, then that can be easier.

[00:30:36.780 --> 00:31:02.880] So, so, so, so, so kind of unclenching and being like, there's no deadline on this. Like when things fall apart, you might have to trust that that can take time and it will end up looking like something completely different. You just like having to let go of all. Well, it's not seeing the thing you were hoping to see to tie it back to what we were talking about earlier, right? It's being open to seeing something else. Yeah, exactly. So you have to really let go. And so that helps.

[00:31:02.880 --> 00:31:24.740] Uh, and the only thing that helps is to go through the woods a few times because it's just like the other day because first few times I went through the woods. It's like, well, they can't literally be anything on the other side of this because this is just confusion. This is horror. And, uh, and then, oh, lo and behold, like that, I ended up with much more clarity and understood things that are important to me.

[00:31:24.740 --> 00:31:54.340] And I ended up writing an essay I like, and, and doing that a few times kind of changed the emotions around it. Confidence is the memory of success. As my, as my friend Jason likes to say, do you keep notebooks in this way? Yeah, I do from time to time. Uh, uh, I sort of alternate, but, but yeah, I do write several hundred thousand words of like journals in a year where I like it can difference.

[00:31:54.340 --> 00:32:23.440] But like some months I'll write 50,000 words in a month, like where I'm just like endlessly sprawling and, and then going. Do you delete them? No, I have, I have them. Um, I can think of like, maybe if I have time, something like I should edit some of that together and then publish it. It could be like a fun sort of companion to the essays. Cause let's take the notebooks for, from the last five years as I've written essays. And like, so that's that, this is kind of the process behind them, the life and the frustrations. Yeah. Yeah.

[00:32:23.440 --> 00:32:52.320] I do find them very valuable. Often I find that as I write them again, a sense of like just being lost and in a moment. And, but what I find valuable often is to, I'll just give myself a few days a week where I'm allowed to kind of wander in the woods in the notebook. I'll just read randomly and let things fall apart without any pressure. And then I'll go back to them maybe a few months later. And then I'll see like, like that was really good.

[00:32:52.440 --> 00:33:19.000] And there I'll find small, it's almost like I'm lost in the woods and I'm, I'm finding these clearings, but I can't really see it at the time. Or I can't pressure myself to see it at the time. Yes. Because then I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll clench. So I'll just go around and then, then when I look back, I, I, I, I find these kind of beautiful essays in, in there. I actually was rereading some diaries I wrote from maybe like two years before I started the blog.

[00:33:19.320 --> 00:33:49.120] And, and I remember that as sort of a dark night of the soul kind of period where I hadn't found my way yet and so on. And I didn't, I hadn't learned how to write. And the fun thing when I was rereading them was that like one, they were much better than I remembered. And two, I had actually like written almost word by word, like two or three essays that I wrote like three years later. So I had already done them in there, but I just didn't notice it. And I didn't have the confidence to see it. So actually that wandering.

[00:33:49.480 --> 00:34:17.400] So if I can go, so now I try to be more persistent about going back. That was right. Returning to those wanderings, but like, yes, I guess I tried to, it's again, a little bit like that sort of being a child and then like editing, writing, drunk and editing, sober. It's a little bit like that. Like being a kid on a WV going around in the woods and then getting back to it, like a few months later, being like a sort of a, maybe a connoisseur. If it's like, I'm going to pick out the best you have works of this. Yeah. It's funny.

[00:34:17.620 --> 00:34:40.640] I want, I totally relate. I write certainly far less than you do, but like I have a writing group I go to. I'll write things one Wednesday morning and I'm like, man, wrong, not in the right mood. This all sucks, whatever. And a week later, I'll look at it and be like, oh, this is pretty good. Like I'm such an unreliable narrator of the present, let alone the other. Yeah.

[00:34:40.720 --> 00:35:07.560] The other thing that's funny about it is on some level, writing itself is this practice of doing this often for the experience of living. Um, you go on a derivouac or whatever. Um, in my experience, uh, unless I spend some time meditating on it and ideally writing about it, I have to kind of trace the grooves once or twice for it to really, there is something about having to encode. The more times we encode something, the more it like gets to work.

[00:35:08.040 --> 00:35:33.300] The other part of this, you don't delete these notebooks. And so there's some element of you in some part of your brain that's saying like, maybe somebody will read these notes. If I'm successful enough or whatever, like one of the points you make about the notebooks is that it's, it's the one place where Bergman isn't being observed. Um, and I guess I'd like to tie it to it. Another point you make, which is you talk about sort of constraining oneself.

[00:35:33.300 --> 00:36:01.640] I think it's with, um, von Trier or Winterberg, like tying your hands behind your back, finding ways to sort of create in ways that are deliberately constrained. Now Skaard forces himself to, I think, write five pages a day at certain times. And then eventually 25,000 words in 24 hours, which. Because this lets not dwell on that. That is it. That is dark. Yeah. Imagine like having agreed to publish that also. He did? Yeah. Yeah. It's probably, yeah. It's, it's in book two of my struggle.

[00:36:02.160 --> 00:36:31.800] And, and, and he's, he's doing it like in the middle of like this being a controversy. Oh my God. So, you know, that knows that like 500,000 people, like 10% of the population in Norway is going to read this. And, and then he's done so much for hours, probably in 25,000 words about like meeting and falling in love with his wife and like, you know, very intense and like painful. Like, yeah, let's not do that. But the point I think is maybe one, one version of this is just like finding ways to sort of prompt yourself into new ways of creating or writing or whatever.

[00:36:31.960 --> 00:36:56.040] And then the other version of this is this element of considering how it's going to be observed. And I'm curious how you think about either tricking yourself. I mean, you, I can't remember what it was specifically, but you wrote somewhere about like spending one week literally writing and it all has to be deleted at the end of the week. Maybe another week where you like, the whole point of it is just to make it as like pop as possible or like most audience oriented as possible.

[00:36:56.840 --> 00:37:14.120] Maybe you haven't done those examples specifically, but I'm curious how much you play with those types of things or even think about this in the case in the notebook, which is like, is there ever a version of writing that if I truly promise to permanently delete afterwards versus put in my back catalog of notebooks, how it would change?

[00:37:15.960 --> 00:37:31.000] I don't think about an audience at all when I'm in my notebook and I'm very, like I could, I think it would be valuable to publish parts of it, but, but as I write it, I don't think about the audience at all.

[00:37:31.000 --> 00:38:00.980] So, uh, and, and I couldn't do, if I go back and read my diaries from when I was like 17, 20, something like that, I can clearly see like I'm young and I have hubris and, and that I think that like this is going to be a read and hopefully not. Uh, but if I read my diaries from, let's say around when I turned 30, I can definitely, there, there's been some shift in my stance where I can clearly feel like this person.

[00:38:01.000 --> 00:38:30.980] Does not, no longer think anyone's going to read. Are you writing to yourself, um, in the future or are you writing to yourself in the future? Yes, exactly. So I think the big change that happened for me in 2019, which was like a precursor to that led to the final sort of breakthrough with the writing, uh, public writing was that I started indexing my diaries. So like once a week I would go through and I would number the pages and then I would do an index on the, on the front page where I would write like on page.

[00:38:31.000 --> 00:38:54.520] Okay. On fold up, uh, two, I talk about Ivan Illich, uh, and then also on fold up 18. Right. So I would list them. This is the re-encoding again, by the way, the retracing. Re-encoding. And then the idea for that was just to, uh, make sure that I would re go back to it and, and, and kind of enter into dialogue with my past self and like not have all of these thoughts, ways that they would be a searchable.

[00:38:55.200 --> 00:39:22.700] But what happened, I think when I did that was that I became my own audience because prior to that, I almost never reread my stuff. And then I started rereading. It became real. Like you, you knew the audience. It's one of the things I like to talk about is, um, it's really easy to write a letter because you know exactly who the audience is, but also, you know, you have extreme confidence. The person will read it because if you write anyone a letter, at least if you know them, they're probably going to read it.

[00:39:22.980 --> 00:39:49.300] And so it's almost a, what I'm hearing you describing almost as a trust of your reader to actually follow through. The, you got into a pattern where future you actually would go back and read it. So it made the stakes more serious. Yeah. And I guess, I can't, I'm like, I'm speculating here, but I suspect early on when I did that, I would read things, go back and read things. And I noticed like, oh, that's cringe. Like I am posting, I am doing these things.

[00:39:49.580 --> 00:40:17.300] And, and that would be embarrassing in front of the audience of myself. And so I would like, I'll learn that close. Right. It is almost like a ballerina in front of a mirror, like looking at the movement of the leg and knows all like, that's the wrong movement of the leg because that that's posing. That's, that's cringe. And, and I guess I kind of, without even thinking about it, how that kind of reinforcement loop, which helped me get into the right post.

[00:40:17.300 --> 00:40:43.180] So, so whenever I write in the notebook now, I always like immediately going to the right posts where I'm like open, creative, willing to linger in confusion and so on. Whereas in other mediums, like if I open the sub stack editor, like I'll, like I can't write, if I try to write in Google docs or if I write, like I'll enter into different stances. Like if I write an email being one stances, like in the WhatsApp or different stances.

[00:40:43.420 --> 00:41:08.760] So, but I have through practice, like encoded a very good stance around my notebook. So I can always go there. Yes. It's an environmental priming that is like, I know what we do here. Boom. I'm in that. There's a little thread, I think that relates to this in terms of how we sort of talk to ourselves and ask ourselves questions. An old thing on, I think it was old on Nick Cave. And maybe almost like a thesis of one of the things the notebooks can do.

[00:41:09.900 --> 00:41:39.340] You're talking about this woman, Kelly, who is writing into Nick Cave for advice on how to be creative. And she's struggling. She's blocked. You say another way to make a distinction between them, Nick and Kelly, is to say that Cave is trying to figure out what his voice is trying to say right here, right now. Well, Kelly wants to hear her voice, tell her what is true about her across time. But they are both introspecting in the sense that they want to know what a voice inside them says if they block out the expectations of broken father society of the audience.

[00:41:39.580 --> 00:41:58.000] Cave is more modest than Kelly here. He is asking not who he is, but in a roundabout way, who am I in relation to this song, this book, this tour? Is there potential in this song? How can I open it up? What does it want? Those questions are hard, but not as hard as who am I and can often be solved in a few hours at the desk.

[00:41:58.000 --> 00:42:26.360] And so I guess my question is, is the secret in part to maybe what you were just describing, this good, healthy kind of productive conversation with ourselves, just to maybe ask simpler questions or to be more specific? Well, if I think about my own notebook, I think another shift, I don't remember exactly when that happened, but maybe around the same time, is that I shifted a lot of it away from myself.

[00:42:26.360 --> 00:42:50.820] Like I used to use my diary to sort of deal with my frustrations. And so I still do that for a little bit, but I started to attend outwards. My notebook was just filled with like reflections about things I wrote, things I saw that my kids were doing, things that happened in nature, conversation that happened. So I started to attend outward.

[00:42:52.180 --> 00:43:15.790] I made a note about that recently where, where's this, it's almost like you can know yourself as an object. And I think that was what Kelly wanted to do. Like, what kind of person am I? Who am I? Who am, like, and... Almost drawing a narrative around yourself as well. And that's very complex. Like, I have no idea who I am.

[00:43:15.950 --> 00:43:44.310] Like, that's, like, like, we're such extremely complicated objects. Like, even, even like saying, like, what is Hamlet or like a short book is very hard. But we're like that times a thousand. Like, we're going around having different experience in spots every moment. And like, trying to, like, define down what that is, it's very hard. It's very hard to have good understanding of yourself as an object.

[00:43:45.170 --> 00:44:15.130] And, and, and I think a lot of people try to turn toward that. And that can just be confusing and navel grazing and so on. And, but, but when I try to attune to things outside of me, like to my kids or to a book or to nature, I also have to connect to myself, but I'm connecting to myself as a subject. Yes. I'm going to connect to myself as like a person paying attention. And like, what am I noticing here?

[00:44:15.250 --> 00:44:44.990] What am I getting frustrated with? Or what am I curious about? And all of that is also like information. And you can understand that kind of subjective perspective of yourself. And, and if you look at someone like Rick Rubin or Nick Cade, they have extreme confidence in their subject. They know themselves as subjects really well. They know the pieces in the circle. They know the debris more so than they are like looking for the boundary shape in a way. Yes. Yes. I think those things.

[00:44:45.230 --> 00:45:12.250] Or maybe another way of putting it would be like, they're seeing the pixels deeply. They have an incredibly high resolution on the pixels, but they're like less concerned with what the like image, the holistic image is. Yes. They do. Yeah. So, yeah, they are on a derivere, right? They are making, yeah, it's like with someone like Nick Cave. It's not clear at all, like where he's going. Obviously music is very important to him as it has been for like 40 or 50 years.

[00:45:13.010 --> 00:45:38.550] But the way that music evolves and the different kinds of like films and books and art projects he does along the way, right? He's making his like small ceramic figurines. Like all of that is like very drifting, very much in just, like if you were trying to understand Nick Cave as an obvious, but let's say you were his management and you were trying to like, what is the Nick Cave brand? Yes.

[00:45:38.850 --> 00:46:07.310] You would never like go like we should do porcelain figurines of the dead, right? I don't know where I'm getting here. But I think it's telling that the world today is very, we are trying to put ourselves into brand shapes, let alone algorithm shaped holes. Like we are trying to make ourselves legible. The modern, certainly the internet is about making yourself legible in a way that is like cohesive enough and small enough and contain enough that it can be like replicated externally.

[00:46:07.770 --> 00:46:30.870] And so I do think it's telling that there's some kind of external pressure to be that way. And by the way, maybe less with Nick, but like people love to like draw some guru box around Rick Rubin and then poke fun at it. And I think Rick just doesn't care because he's just like, I like these pixels or I like these little shapes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly.

[00:46:31.050 --> 00:46:54.870] Like the, the, the, the understanding that people have of Rick from the outside is, is from a very deep divorce from, from what he is from the inside. I think they're observing him far more than he's observing himself. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, and also like the stereotypes of him, like just being a guru, like where he's actually a very, very intellectual person and like spends enormous times reading and so on. Like that's not what, well, damn. Right.

[00:46:56.770 --> 00:47:25.890] This, I think relates to a thing that relates to also to what we were talking about at the top, which I would call a broad thing around being unpredictable. And I think that extends into taking risks and agency and handful of other things. You say, I have such difficulty hearing what I feel when there are strong external reasons to do something. We were speaking about that. And as a result, you kind of need to create the space to become more unpredictable. You're talking about AI.

[00:47:26.110 --> 00:47:51.150] You say a language model basically analyzes a string of words and completes it by predicting how the text would have continued if it was a sentence on the internet. Your job, on the other hand, is to write the least predictable thing that still makes sense. And then you say, once you learn that grass is supposed to be green, it becomes almost embarrassing to make it blue, even though real grass is often blue, as good painters learn when they start to pay closer attention to reality.

[00:47:51.490 --> 00:48:20.790] My sense here is that there is being unpredictable for its own sake, which I think the wrong reading of how do I make myself irreplaceable to AI? Like you could imagine someone just trying to be chaotic. And using unpredictability as a path to getting towards, I'm not sure what the right word is here, like where you want to go or to the place that is right or to a place that is ours, maybe something that is true.

[00:48:20.790 --> 00:48:48.850] Like, how do you know the difference? Whether it be in a stylistic choice in creativity and writing or in a life decision choice, I could imagine there would be a risk of just being unpredictable for its own sake. Yeah. I think maybe I'm going to push back on that in terms here. I don't think having as a goal to be unpredictable. I think that is, again, playing to the audience.

[00:48:48.850 --> 00:49:13.890] Like, I am trying to fight the AI or something. I think that, again, better to try to orient what is exciting or what is alive and so on. Like, it's maybe more what I would say is what to aim for. I was speaking about, like, when it comes to constraints and unpredictability, I was thinking about Young Cage and Lushman Trier.

[00:49:13.890 --> 00:49:38.810] So, they both do very unpredictable work and we both use constraints a lot in the process. So, like, Young Cage, he has this piece, I think, where he set up a system and then he's using AI-Shing or like sell endices and so on to, like, make all the decisions. So, the music is total chaos, right?

[00:49:38.970 --> 00:50:00.150] It's like the timing of the notes, the pictures, everything is, like, decided through this random system. I find, I mean, that's a fun experiment, but it's horror to listen to in my ears. It's like, it can be interesting for a few minutes. It's a hack. It's a hack to, funnily enough, Sayan rolls dice to decide to do things in her life.

[00:50:00.270 --> 00:50:29.890] But I don't think she's, she's using it to get to a place of kind of openness or derive or original seeing versus using it as a way to, like, get to the finished product, which maybe is the difference. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, because, yes, exactly. Because randomness can produce all sorts of, it will get you out of the habitual. It will get you to places, combinations you would have never seen before.

[00:50:32.030 --> 00:50:52.810] But Young Cage, in that at least, he doesn't then apply his own taste on it. He just says, okay, so the system has run its work. Now we have random chaos. Here we go. And that's one kind of experiment. And then you have, well, I was going to go with Lotion 3, but we could go with Brian Enois maybe closer.

[00:50:53.010 --> 00:51:21.250] He also does these things where he has a system, I think, that runs in his house where he has, you know, 10,000 sonic landscapes that he's made across the years. That has never amounted to anything. And then his system will pick two at random and play them at the same time in his loudspeaker. And then he can just, like, push a bottom. And it will change into a different combination. And then he can push another bottom. And it saves that combination.

[00:51:22.030 --> 00:51:47.090] So he's, like, exposing himself to a lot of dissonance. But then he's applying his taste. Like, nah, it's a cue. Yeah. So then he gets outside of his habitual space of ideas. But he then picks the ones that are interesting and then reworks them and improves them into something that works. So that's the difference between him and Cage. And I would say then, again, that Larson tree, what he's doing when he's applying constraints on himself is something similar.

[00:51:47.870 --> 00:52:09.430] He's applying constraints that limit him from doing the things that are easy and that he knows will work. He's a very, very talented with, like, framing. And I mean, if you look at the films he made in the 80s, they look like Golden Age Hollywood. It's, like, so crisp. Everything is, like, so beautifully choreographed. Everything.

[00:52:09.730 --> 00:52:37.910] And then he very consciously said, like, I'm going to forbid myself from doing all of those things that I am famous for and that I do well. So I'm only going to use handheld camera. There's going to be, like, for a period where there was even no artificial lightning. And then he brought that back in. But, and he has all these constraints that is forcing him to, like, remove all of that. But then he's not just, like, making shitty films.

[00:52:38.130 --> 00:53:05.130] He's actually, like, within that realm, now that I can't do the normal interesting things that I like, I'm going to have to go in a new direction and make something new interesting that I haven't tried before. And he actually ends up finding novel things that, but they're not only novel, they're also more powerful. They are resonating with us as an audience at a deeper level. And that's what matters. It doesn't matter that it's novel. But it matters that it shakes us.

[00:53:05.290 --> 00:53:35.210] So the tension here, I was going to say, is it feels sort of like he's using unpredictability, to go back to the earlier point, as a tool to unlock more aliveness. Or maybe unpredictability is still the wrong word, but he's using these constraints. I guess the question, you write a lot about Eno in the ways that Eno is really good at just, like, risking everything over and over again. And you also, I think, critically make the stipulation that, like, he has, like, upped his level of risk-taking gradually over time.

[00:53:35.550 --> 00:54:01.150] I think at one point you say, if you have a hit and can build up some savings, that is meant to fund bigger risks going forward, not keeping up with the Joneses. Am I habitually doing what I had to do to get here rather than looking clear-eyed at the possibilities that actually exist now? Wow. The question here, I think, to maybe go back to Von Trier, is, like, do we know, are his films actually better? Maybe to better ground it with you.

[00:54:01.310 --> 00:54:27.250] Like, last time we spoke, you talked about how if you could, you'd spend a year just writing about Bergman's diary. And is that the best thing for you to work on? Is the most, is more love and relationships list, as we joked about last time? Like, maybe go back to the mental proprioception. It's about this, like, balance in yourself and with the world that, like, has some space between it that allows you to be, chase what you're alive to and be responsive with the world.

[00:54:27.250 --> 00:54:52.950] And there are these hacks that maybe the most truly attuned person wouldn't even need to use the hacks. And they would just purely make, Lars is using these constraints because he knows that his tendency will be to... I think, well, we'll start with an image again. Can you imagine that we're, like, moving through a, like, giant labyrinth, a maze?

[00:54:54.570 --> 00:55:21.730] And when it's not even, like, the normal labyrinth, it's, like, a high dimensional. It's going in, like, 100 dimensions at the same point. And inside this labyrinth, we're going to have good artworks. We're going to have good essays. We're going to have good startups. We're going to have good research ideas. Somewhere in there. And our job is, like, to take the right path through this labyrinth to find the good stuff. That's sort of what we're doing when we're creating new things.

[00:55:24.010 --> 00:55:50.310] And these different constraints and different stances are, like, ways, rules of thumb for how to navigate this labyrinth. So, for example, if you're applying constraints, you're saying that I'm not allowed to do this and that. You're blocking off big parts of the labyrinth. The majority of the labyrinth are saying, I'm going to only work in this direction. And then you're forced to maybe go further down in that direction and you'll find new stuff.

[00:55:52.850 --> 00:56:21.630] But I don't think we can know beforehand that, like, where in the labyrinth will the good stuff be? Right. So sometimes maybe going very pop, like Coldplay. I think Coldplay had done some, like, extraordinary art. But I think, I'm not sure. But I think they have thought very hard about what the audience wants. And they've, like, optimized and gone down the labyrinth very, very hard in that direction. And they ended up finding some good things.

[00:56:21.630 --> 00:56:51.310] And other people said, you can't know in the forehand. And if you look at Lars von Trier, it's very clear that he's always, like, playing these rules on himself. And more than half of the time, he abandons the projects. Because it turns out that that part of the labyrinth is barbarian, right? Yeah, it's an explorer exploit a bit in some sense. Because, like, he had a project where he was, that he started, I think, in the early 90s, where he was going to film for three minutes every year for 30 years. And there's going to be a film.

[00:56:51.590 --> 00:57:21.330] So that's, like, a strange constraint. Turned out that was a terrible film. So he's not working on that anymore. So he's done many of those. So I guess you just have to try different parts of the labyrinth. And, yeah, I don't think there's, like, a one-stats. I like that a lot. Yeah, it's funny that the arbitrary constraints to unpredictability or the hacking it or whatever, that's one version. Another version that maybe fits into that model is you talk about in the context of Herzog.

[00:57:21.470 --> 00:57:48.570] But it reminded me of the Steve Jobs thing as well. It's this thing about Herzog just, like, being upset about doing things the proper way. One short, tiny segment of it is the professionals having too many preconceived ideas of how to go about things, wasted resources and missed the light in the trees. They're, like, worried about the makeup. And he's obsessed with the golden light. Steve Jobs speaks about this at some point in, I think it's in, like, the 80s. And he's talking about how they had some way of doing accounting for hardware.

[00:57:48.790 --> 00:58:12.390] And you basically flub the numbers because there's no way to get the numbers exact. And he was just like, that seems dumb. Like, we should just change it. And his point is he calls this, like, business folklore. It's just, like, the way things are done, the way things have to be done. And it feels like that's another version of reasons you might not look in a certain part of the labyrinth. And you're, like, you come across a certain kind of, like, dilemma in the labyrinth.

[00:58:12.390 --> 00:58:41.810] And it's just like, well, all conventional wisdom says that when you run across a set of options A through C, you choose door C or B because door A tends to lead the wrong way. Like, it is about kind of, like, getting yourself – maybe this is what I was coming back to with the original opening around unpredictability, is that unpredictability almost feels like deliberately just being unpredictable, rolling the dice, is a very low-dimensional way of doing this broader thing that you're describing.

[00:58:42.670 --> 00:59:11.550] Yeah, so dice is just an example of a constraint. And the thing you were talking about there with, like, Horsog not wanting to do film, like, he's irritated with the crew because they're going through the motions and doing all of normal Hollywood stuff. And he doesn't feel like that's necessary because he'd rather catch these accidents than the beautiful light that comes on at some point. And that is the tile again, right?

[00:59:11.670 --> 00:59:41.510] They are, like, this is how you – they have a tile. This is how you make film. And when you're dealing with Bernard Horsog, like, the normal Hollywood tile is the wrong shape, right? You have to be able to break that apart and go, like, I'm going to put this together in a new way. I'm going to be open to the fact that maybe we're not going to do makeup in this scene because we'd rather feel like right now the morning lights, yes, and be open for that because that's the right thing for Asystetic and his kind of ethics of film.

[00:59:42.430 --> 01:00:07.090] But they couldn't because they were so locked in. They had this kind of northern shield again, right? So if we don't get the makeup, we won't have the tile that makes this a square, and we have to make it a square. That's the thing they're saying. Yeah, yeah. They're just, like, reapplying the same idea that they have framework. Like, this is how we do it. It's going to be ABC. It's going to be the same over and over again.

[01:00:08.290 --> 01:00:34.890] Whereas if you're going to do really good work, you have to be just open to this thing right now, right? Like, the film they were making in that case is, like, a very gritty, handheld Vietnam film where it's supposed to be very, like, claustrophobic. You don't need makeup for that. Like, if you pay attention to the film you're making, that is not necessary. But the other way. Yeah. But they're so, like, we're supposed to do it that way.

[01:00:35.530 --> 01:01:04.930] So, but to make good art, you have to, like, try to be, like, naive or innocent. And, like, this is the situation, like, and so if we're filming, like, what kind of karma movements do we need here? What kind of stuff do we need here? And not do the habitual thing and just, like, make the mosaic specifically for this piece of work. How do you think someone like that, the counterargument to this framework would be that breaking away,

[01:01:05.210 --> 01:01:30.450] breaking apart all the tiles every time is obviously not tenable. And to your point earlier, the more you break them, the better you get at rebuilding them. And someone like Herzog on some level is probably, like, very comfortable in the broken debris space. He's very comfortable in ambiguity. I think that might be a trait of what you would call someone with high agency. But also, like, that is fundamentally, like, there's a reason we have the consistency of the models.

[01:01:30.610 --> 01:01:56.170] And so, like, is it just about getting more comfortable in ambiguity so you can speedrun that faster? Like, how do you know when to, maybe this is, again, going back to the unpredictability thing. Unpredictability is the goal in and of itself leads you astray, leads you to overrating doing things from first principles, perhaps. And that's not the point. The point is to do things from first principles. The point is to find a new place in the labyrinth.

[01:01:58.310 --> 01:02:24.710] Maybe it's just attunement, as we keep coming back to. But, I mean, you said a part of your talk about, like, it's very costly to do it that way. And, yes, that is the case. But, like, if what we're talking about now is not, like, how to run your accounting bureau that is doing the same thing over and over again, then you shouldn't apply this way of thinking.

[01:02:24.970 --> 01:02:53.710] This is not, like, and when you're doing it, the filling the podcast, like, setting up the, you probably shouldn't reinvent that every time. And let's make that an entire artistic thing because the thing you're trying to maybe, if the focus for what you're doing with the podcast is, like, trying to push the conversations into a better space. So, so maybe around that part where it really matters, it's worth, like, putting in that effort. I get what I'm trying to say.

[01:02:53.850 --> 01:03:23.630] Yes, it's like, if you just want to get a result fast, then just tires. Yeah, it's the same as if you're building a house. If you have, like, these floors that are, I don't know what it's called, like, you just click them in. And then it looks like a fake wooden floor. It's very fast. Like, it's sort of a tiling. But if you want to make a really nice house, of course, you're going to have, like, a carpenter and hand carve every little part of it. And it depends on what business you're in.

[01:03:23.730 --> 01:03:53.630] And if you're in the business of, like, creating new ideas for a startup or art or essays, like, yes, it's a very costly kind of research cost. So, these are costly projects, but it's the only way we know how to, like, get to these powerful new experiences and products and artworks. One last thing here. You have this, I think you wrote it shortly after we last spoke. We talked about some similar themes last time.

[01:03:53.730 --> 01:04:22.590] You wrote about agency. At the beginning of that, you had this little excerpt that kind of prompted it about Maude. I wish I had a book that I could put in her hands, and it helps her learn what many never learn or learn too late, namely, that the possibilities are much bigger than you think. That you can live more deeply and truly, and that you can solve almost any problem if you put your mind to it. A book about how to handle being sentenced to freedom and to handle it effectively and authentically and responsibly.

[01:04:24.350 --> 01:04:44.710] You go on in that piece to talk about autonomy and efficacy as these kind of two components of agency. The capacity to dig inside and figure out what wants to happen through you, no matter how strange or wrong it seems to others. The thing I was thinking about in the context of all this is, like, maybe it's similar to cost, is risk. What is the relationship between agency and risk?

[01:04:44.710 --> 01:05:12.210] And how do you think about, along the lines of everything we just spoke about in trying to do truly new creative things in that labyrinth, how do you think about updating your model of risk? Maybe specifically in the, like, Eno sense of how do you use the current success to unlock the new unknown thing versus playing the hits? Yeah, that part is hard.

[01:05:12.570 --> 01:05:41.870] It's like our sense of self and our mental models are always sort of a sort of lagging indicator or something. They are slow to update. I struggle with that a lot because the rate of change for me has been quite rapid. Like, I went from, like, literally, like, being totally on my own and, like, isolated on the island off of Widmoo.

[01:05:42.330 --> 01:06:07.470] That was, like, six years ago. And then maybe three years ago, someday I started to have some success. And now, like, it's my job. And then, like, and when you have that kind of almost exponential change in your life, it's very, very hard to, like, update. Because I still kind of feel like the person I was, like, four years ago or something, which is not who I am now.

[01:06:07.650 --> 01:06:31.030] And so I probably, to get back to risk, like, I probably take way too little risk. I think all of us do, almost overwhelmingly. Maybe not Elon, but Peter Thiel. But, like, but specifically, like, in my case, it's, like, I'm still, I haven't, like, updated that, like, I'm actually, like, not struggling with money that are anymore. Right?

[01:06:31.410 --> 01:07:00.490] But that used to be, like, a terror for me with money for many years and until, like, less than a year ago. And so I still think that way, even though it's not true and that's making me make not the optimal decisions I could be, make it. Because, like, if I. It's a scarcity mindset that is seeping in. Yeah. And I'm not looking at this equation clear-eyed. Like, I'm not, like, noticing that, like, the situation is actually like this.

[01:07:00.750 --> 01:07:23.270] Like, the amount of money I could invest into a project is higher now. I could deal with this and that. I'm not noticing that. And because I'm not noticing, I'm actually not making the best decisions. And I don't know how to actually make that faster, that update. Yeah. Well, someone told me. I would love to know.

[01:07:23.950 --> 01:07:51.010] But I do think another thought that came up when you talked about risk is, and which kind of gestered that in my last answer was that. It kind of helps to think a little bit like a VC or something. You're making a bunch of bets in your life. And, like, every time I'm writing an essay, I'm making a small bet. Like, I'm betting that this will be a valuable thing for me to spend 50 hours working on. I'm betting on these conversations and I'm betting on things.

[01:07:51.010 --> 01:08:18.770] I find it's usually the case that it's not worth, like, doing due diligence on everything. And that it's a good idea to, like, not take risk in most domains of your life so that you can play very risky in some domain. Because it's the bold, risky moves that have high payoff. But in order for them to have high payoff, you have to do due diligence.

[01:08:18.990 --> 01:08:44.830] You have to actually think things through and, like, position yourself correctly so that your experiments have some likelihood of paying off. Like, most of them will fail. But you want, like, 10% of them to succeed. And therefore, you, like, do that. You have to be okay with, like, I'm not, like, I don't think too much about, like, my clothes or things like that. Like, I try to simplify many parts of my life in order so that I... I was going to say, you're very concentrated.

[01:08:45.390 --> 01:09:15.110] You, like, to the extent you are, like, you have almost, like, overwhelmingly concentrated on a few fairly risky things that maybe are less risky than they look on the outside or whatever. But you're not, you don't have a diversified basket on a relative basis. Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. And you see that when Albert Maslow did his research on, like, people are highly self-actualized. You see that, that they're making concentrated vets in certain domains.

[01:09:15.330 --> 01:09:44.590] And they're not, like, taking a lot of risk in their entire life. Usually they are, like, selected conformists. Like, so people who are very, like, self-actualized, in his opinion, right, they tend to dress very conservatively. They tend to have normal haircuts. They tend to, like, in all sorts of ways because they're trying to minimize needless friction, right? Because if I'm wearing a funny t-shirt, that's going to cause some friction in certain situations.

[01:09:44.950 --> 01:10:13.850] And do I really want to spend my limited amount of energy and, like, time, money, everything on the friction of my t-shirt? Or do I rather spend it on, like, my relationships or my creative work? And so... You keep talking about clothing too long, you're going to sound like Mark Zuckerberg. You've got to be careful. I think the point is, the point is well made. Yeah, but it's a point I often make. It's, like, priorities. Like, what... Don't sacrifice the wrong thing. Yeah, yeah.

[01:10:13.950 --> 01:10:43.310] What's the thing you're trying to do? And then you... Yeah, I guess. And then Steve Jobs, again, like, to get back to clothes. Like, we just wore the same clothes every day because dad doesn't have to think about that. And there's no friction. Like, it's very... What about, um... Maybe we'll talk about this later, but, like... There's another thing that's sort of, like, don't get cute. Like, if you found a thing that works, like, really, really... We talked about this last time. You were, like, great.

[01:10:43.310 --> 01:11:12.130] You wrote a couple of good essays. Like, that's cool. Let's see if you stick around. Like, I'm four years into this. Now you're five years into this. Like, what about 50 years? And I think about this, like, I'm working on this project and I'm very early in. I'm a year and a little change. And it has more success than it had before. And so, like, am I... How wide is my aperture? Am I taking enough risk? Am I trying enough other things? Should I... Do I... Do I just keep doing this thing? Like, and really, really... Like... And I think I'm drawing a false comparison.

[01:11:13.110 --> 01:11:40.390] But... I'm not totally sure how to think about risk in the context of, like, opening up the aperture to planting other seeds versus, like, don't get cute. Like, you found... Hit the ball. Like, keep hitting the tennis ball. I don't know, like, if I think about myself, like, how much choice I have. It's like... Because I keep thinking that, like, you know, maybe...

[01:11:41.310 --> 01:12:08.570] There are some very big, very valuable things I could be doing if I just, like, doubled and tripled down on certain things that would be very, very valuable for other people I could make. And I would also probably earn a lot of money by doing those things. And sometimes I think, like, maybe I should do that. Like, and then I could have a bunch of money that I could donate and I could, like, have much more impact and do... And I just can't. I can't do it. It's...

[01:12:09.690 --> 01:12:38.250] And that thing is just sort of a personality trait, right? I am someone who's seeking and trying to fix. But to some extent, I think it's a valuable thing to sort of think about at times. Like, this is a period where I'm locking down and, like, not changing plans all the time. Because, I mean, there are certain things I have done. Like, I am only doing the newsletter. That's the only thing I do. I don't take on any other work, basically.

[01:12:38.610 --> 01:13:06.930] And so I've locked down that. But then I'm keeping some aperture inside of that bell. Because otherwise, that's just rebellion. Quit the whole thing. But conversely, you've talked about a world where, like, the essays are the exhaust of the life you've cultivated or the state of mind you've cultivated or even the milieu you've cultivated. Like, you've alluded in your writing to a world where in the future there are... I mean, you threw out a whole bunch of ideas. Whether it's, like, doing more investigative kind of, like, work or interviews.

[01:13:07.590 --> 01:13:35.690] Bringing people to the island. Making films. It's easy for me to imagine a future for you that is, like, Henrik wrote essays in The Barn for 20 years. And maybe the output of that, among other things, is that you write, as you say, a few good essays. And there's a different version of you that is, like, the world of Henrik or the world of Escaping Flatland has many more...

[01:13:36.200 --> 01:14:02.230] I think about this a lot in terms of what I'm doing. Like, especially as someone who also has a tendency to want to, like, I like novelty and shiny objects and variety. Like, how do you... Along this... Maybe to tie it all the way back to this earlier theme of proprioception and balance. Like, what is the... When you are attuned to yourself around what to do next, how are you attuned to the ways you lean in that way?

[01:14:02.870 --> 01:14:32.320] I'm very much at, like, the edge of my thinking because I'm going to be incoherent. That's hopefully the goal with a little bit of this. Yeah. And... Yeah, I'm struggling with these thoughts a lot. And I think... Like, one promising direction for my, like, personal work is to... I've had a period where I've locked down very much and done my thing in order to get where I am now. I had to, like... This works.

[01:14:32.760 --> 01:15:01.640] And this is, like, very aligned with what I value. So I'm just going to double and triple down on that for a few years. And for the last year, I've been like, should... What's the next step for that? And I haven't figured that out. And... But I think, like, one thing that could be valuable is to... Making sure that I put myself in interesting situations, work on interesting projects, such that essays kind of happen of themselves.

[01:15:02.040 --> 01:15:31.640] And, like, trying to put myself in a situation where I free up more time. Because right now, the blog is, like, taking everything from me. And that would be interesting to, like, carve out so that I work on the blog three days a week. And the rest of the time is me doing related work, which is putting me in interesting new situations that feeds the blog, right? So... Right. Because... I also can't keep going doing what I'm doing now. Because then I'm just going to...

[01:15:31.640 --> 01:16:00.120] Because now I'm basically spending six days a week on the blog. At some point, I'm going to get very boring because I'm not having enough new experiences. So I probably need to, like, start making films or start a podcast or start traveling more. I need to probably do those things in order to, like, feed the main things. I guess I'm maybe trying to find some way of making those things work together. And I haven't figured that out because...

[01:16:00.960 --> 01:16:24.620] But you have to see that threat. Like, the root of the question, hilariously, is actually just, like, really trying to figure out what is more risky. Is it riskier to stay focused and, like, not get distracted and not get cute? Or is it riskier to try all these other things and, like, lose the plot? And I think that the root of it, at least how I would relate to it and what I... My reading of you is very attuned.

[01:16:24.620 --> 01:16:53.760] And you are very attuned to knowing that you, at some future point, will... Like, there is... Forgive the maybe crass metaphor. It's almost like there's a tumor or something. And there's, like, a little seed of something that's like, well, it's really working to do the essay six days a week right now. But I probably won't be able... And so I need to course... I need to unfold or I need to... That's how I see it.

[01:16:56.680 --> 01:17:22.220] Yeah, one thing that comes to mind when I'm talking about this topic, and, like, I think I'm seeing it maybe a little bit more clearly as we talk, is that... I think there's a... I think I have this from, like, some of Taleb's books. I've seen Taleb where he talks about... Maybe an anti-fragile talks about... In certain kinds of jobs, like, if you have a normal 9-to-5 job, you're gonna... It's gonna look very stable.

[01:17:23.160 --> 01:17:49.200] And then one day you're gonna get fired and then your income is gonna go to zero. Whereas if you drive an Uber, your income is gonna be up and down a lot more. But you're actually more resilient or anti-fragile because you're planning buffers in your spending and so on to handle swings. So if there's a... And if there's a downturn, your salary is only gonna get cut 20%. You're not gonna get cut 100%.

[01:17:50.620 --> 01:18:19.860] And that idea, I think, maybe applies to my situation, too, is that I could double down on the things that work. And there's a lot of people failing me that I should do. Like, there's these book deals I could do and so on. And that would earn me more money. It would have more impact short-term. But it's like putting all the eggs in one basket. And the risk is that I'll burn out. I'll get bored. Other people get bored. I'll be locked in. And so actually, that's probably my...

[01:18:19.860 --> 01:18:46.980] It's gonna look safer and more stable right now. But over 50 years' time, it's probably riskier because I'm locking myself in. So actually trading off like 30% of my time, 50% of my time into more kind of illegible, diverse bets. That will make my situation now more unstable. My income go to up and down and so on. But it's probably over time a less risky path.

[01:18:47.680 --> 01:19:17.600] So, but yeah, that's my current slot at this very hour. It relates to a finance idea, which is the number one thing is to stay in the game. Is to keep playing the game. Optimize to be able to keep playing the game. Not to hit zero. And I think there's a sort of energy curiosity version of that. Yeah. Yeah. And I've had that thought like on and off for a long time because I think I could have gone like go pro, so to speak.

[01:19:17.700 --> 01:19:47.140] I could have become a full-time writer a year earlier, maybe even sooner. But as soon as I saw that that was possible, I was kind of afraid because I feared that like if I, if I were just like to spring to that goal, quit my job, not be completely reliant on this income. And that might be just a terrible situation for me. It might be very stressful.

[01:19:47.540 --> 01:20:14.880] I might feel very locked in and having to deliver sort of things. So I like consciously started to be a little bit unpredictable, a little bit like I would drop my cadence. I would go silent for a month. I would like throw curve balls and break balls, different stuff. And that just slowed my growth quite a lot. And I shone a lot of subscribers, but it meant that I had the permission a year later

[01:20:14.880 --> 01:20:42.700] when I could like, again, in that slower path, get to the point. Now I knew I had permission, like I can go silent for a month. I can throw. It enabled you to go farther and to go longer. And because, yeah, because I was afraid. Otherwise, I'd just be too afraid. So I do already have a lot of latitude in there. Yeah, right. But, but, but the question is, do I need even more? Well, and the challenge with all of this is that you could have read, and it's possible it actually was risk aversion then.

[01:20:42.700 --> 01:21:09.800] But the challenge is risk aversion could actually like, it can kind of sit next to like knowing yourself well enough to know that you have to go slow to go longer or something. And I think the, yeah, the challenge, it's, it's, I'm, I'm trying to build up and attune in myself to like better identify just fear and risk aversion when that's all it is. Because you can, when you're an analytical person or introspective person, you could talk yourself to a lot of things.

[01:21:10.160 --> 01:21:38.700] Oh, I'm just, I'm, I'm publishing slower because, which is why the, the, the very Silicon Valley advice, which is just like go faster, more, be more agentic is, I think generally tends to be pretty good. But the, the challenge then too is Silicon Valley is not, um, in that mentality broadly doesn't tend to build the most enduring things. Yeah. It's interesting with risk aversion too, right?

[01:21:38.840 --> 01:22:04.980] Cause what I noticed in that situation was that I know that I am risk averse. I am risk averse. Like, and I have to be because like, I, I am the sole provider of my family. Like I have to be risk averse. I can't take those kinds of bets. And, and knowing that like planning in enough buffer and enough like creative freedom. But that probably makes you realize how really risk averse you were before you had a family. What do you mean?

[01:22:05.360 --> 01:22:34.280] Um, well, maybe I'm projecting or assuming, but, um, my assumption would be in the same way that I think I don't have that much time. And I, if you spend a day in my life, you would be like laughing about how much time I have. And I suspect there's a similar amount of like the amount of risk that you can take when you're 25 or whatever, like, and don't have a wife and kids is so dramatic. I'm sure like you, my assumption would be that if you were in your 25 year old shoes, you'd

[01:22:34.280 --> 01:23:00.180] be like, oh my gosh, dude, you're not taking enough risk. Yeah. Maybe. I think I was pretty calibrated when it came to risk. I think my problem was more, um, lack of knowledge and, and as a lack of, uh, good habits. Yeah. Uh, maybe I could have taken, I could have taken even more risk, but, but I, I took more risk then than I do now.

[01:23:00.180 --> 01:23:28.840] Uh, let's say, uh, but, but I, but I definitely squandered my time in a way that kind of makes me fry. Now it's like, I had so much time and I accomplished almost nothing. And now I have, oh, allow, I have a bit more time again, but for many years I had no time at all. And, and I had to like, right, get up in that five in the morning and bright and stuff. And I was like, and they were sitting there five in the morning and you're super tired. Like, like, why didn't I do this before I had to get it soon? Yeah.

[01:23:29.200 --> 01:23:56.120] One little thing, uh, this week, a friend asked me about what I want. And it's very like, um, specifically like desire. And, and I'm curious how you think about that as it relates to attunement in, in the specific sense of sort of like really wanting something. I almost like, I'm not quite even sure. I, it kind of caught me off guard in my inability to answer the question.

[01:23:56.800 --> 01:24:22.480] When you think about maybe everything we just spent the last 20 minutes talking about how, whatever, some people really, some people really want money and they get money. Maybe they're not fully aware that how bad they, they want that. But, but I like the word desire. I think that, I think that, that word in itself, like there's a lot of good work here. Uh, Chris, I think at least for me, and I mean, this doesn't apply if your goal is to make as much money as possible.

[01:24:22.600 --> 01:24:51.500] This only applies to the bureau where a person who wants to write essays and so on. Uh, or it's up to you to, to, to, to like, see if it transfers to any other domain. But I find out it's very encouraging that. Yeah. It's, it's, that it should feel like desire. It should feel bodily. It should, it should feel like my kids when they are galloping down the road. Right? This is it. It should be. And I treat myself again. Like I, the reason I talk about these things is because I find them hard.

[01:24:51.740 --> 01:25:18.360] I treat myself all the time. So, um, so I have a bunch of like very intellectual friends who are always reading like hard books and so on. And sometimes I'll be like, oh, I'm gonna, I'm gonna do an essay with all my reflections on the brother Kramasso. Right? And, and, and then I stop working on that. And then I was like, no, I actually just can't, I'm trying to do first our friends. I am actually not excited about, right?

[01:25:18.500 --> 01:25:43.940] But brother Kramasso, like I'm actually excited about like the things that are feeling light, open, playful, like galloping down the street. I just, we're different. Uh, uh, and, uh, and, and I'm trying to, and, and, and in order for me to do good work in, in my line work is, is, is that I have to get back to that thing. And, and it's very hard. I miss it all the time.

[01:25:44.120 --> 01:26:13.540] Uh, I get like, I get these ideas that sound like good ideas and there are projects that I admire from afar. Like I'd love to read that essay. I'd love to read that book. But it's, it's like from, from the heads, it's like, I can, I can calculate that that's a good thing to do. And I sometimes think that I want that as, but, but the thing I want is the thing that, that makes me like feel playful and lose in my body.

[01:26:13.780 --> 01:26:25.240] And yeah. And there's often like almost embarrassing in some sense, those things. Um, so as I like that word, sorry, like what, what is like making your blood boil a little

[01:26:53.820 --> 01:27:20.760] bit? Calculation of volume. This is the repeating day. Yeah, exactly. Which we did in book six of that. And there was segment where she was talking about, um, Plato and there's a dialogue with Socrates where they're talking about that. Like in the past, the time used to go in the opposite direction. And I was like, and I got in my head, it's like, what would that feel like? And, and I started imagining like, uh, living your life backward.

[01:27:21.020 --> 01:27:49.980] And like you'd go around visiting different funerals and like noticing how sad you were at them to find your friends. Because like the sadder you got at funeral, the cause of rents and like, and then at some times you would have to try find some parents, you know, if you were living backwards and like, cause eventually we'd have to climb back into a woman who would like carry you further into the past and can travel yourself. This is a very strange thing. Right. But I got very excited about that video.

[01:27:50.360 --> 01:28:17.540] And, and it's not like an obviously good idea. Right. In some sense, in my line of work, it's like, that's not like what he saw. It's a new part of the labyrinth that you've never been in before though. But, but, but I know that idea for some reason, I mean, now I give it a lot of space. It's just like a small thought that happened for three minutes in my head, but I got excited about it. Is that it? Yeah, there's a lift. And I can't explain, like, that's not an obvious escape in the flatland essay or something. I don't know where that's going.

[01:28:17.540 --> 01:28:46.780] And maybe it will end up most likely when it ended up as nothing, or it might end up as something completely different that doesn't look like this at all. But, but there's some seed there that is, and I'm trying to more and more trust that just that excitement. Like if I travel down this and let that again, go into confusion, like, cause I don't know, like what, how could this work? This, this idea, what is this trying to do? And if I go down there, I might end up with a story from my childhood and it would be like,

[01:28:46.780 --> 01:29:15.020] it would be something completely different, but I'll just trust that this is some interesting part of the labyrinth. Hmm. It's a nice compliment to aliveness, which is a word you use so often in talking about the writing. You talk about like a lightning bolt in your body, but it, it feels like those two things are operating in a similar part of the, of our inner space. Maybe. Yeah. Yeah. I guess, I guess aliveness is, is like the catchphrase for, for that.

[01:29:15.340 --> 01:29:44.440] But, but yeah, today I'm, I'm feeling galloping down the street. It is, it is, it's, it's better because it's more visceral because alive is like a little bit of a dead word. Well, I was, I was going to, I don't think I need to ask. I think that is, it's, it's funny too, with things like this, there's something so true it's pointing at. And yet you use the same word out with it too many times. It sort of gets dulled. Yeah. It's like important to find new, new ways to hold it. It's, it's a, I don't know if I've told this story before, but it's a, it's a lovely sort

[01:29:44.440 --> 01:30:13.540] of apocryphal story about, um, mental institution in Copenhagen. I think so. And then it was called, yeah, it was called like mental institution. Right. And at some point they started feeling that was maybe a little bit old fashioned, like cold words or how they, they wanted to change it to psychiatric hospital or something. Like, I don't know, uh, but they had this beautiful carved stone in front of the house, uh, where it said mental institution. And it's like, what you would do.

[01:30:13.640 --> 01:30:43.380] And then at some meeting, someone had the brilliant idea. Can we just like flip the stone over and we can write the new name on the other side? I was like, that's a brilliant idea. They went out, flipped the stone. And then it said, idiot asylum, uh, because like words will get destroyed. So it's like this, in this continual noob of having to rename this place because whatever name they picked for it should be drag of the dirt. Uh, uh, fonts do a lot of things. That's good.

[01:30:43.740 --> 01:31:10.080] Um, I'd like to talk a little bit about remoteness or space. And I think there are different ways that I guess I mean, different things I mean by that, but a place to start from Ingmar Bergman's workbook, April 5th, 1955, the night. As you know, I am afraid of emptiness, desolation, and stillness. I cannot bear the silence and isolation. Death, emptiness is a mirror turned to your own face. And this is you.

[01:31:10.360 --> 01:31:36.880] Almost everything that makes up our world first appeared in a solitary head. The innovations, the tools, the images, the stories, the prophecies, and religions. It did not come from the center. It came from those who ran from it. Why is some form of isolation so foundational to being creative? Um, well, if we're going to get technical, and I decide, so let's go technical.

[01:31:38.000 --> 01:32:05.400] When you have a larger population, as you have in the center, in the big city, in the mainstream, they are going to filter harder. They're going to be like a bandwidth pass. So it's very, very hard to get an idea to catch on in a big population. Um, because they are, because you have to make everyone believe it. It has to be really good. You have to reach like a critical mass. Yeah. And for that to work, it is very hard.

[01:32:05.480 --> 01:32:29.920] So, so, and the good thing about that is that like the mainstream will filter the bad ideas. Right. So the mainstream now are not like the anti-vaxxers and so on. The mainstreams have fairly reasonable understanding of like how vaccines work. Right. But they're also not like a good understanding of vaccines either. So big populations filter ideas very hard. So they kill the best and the worst ideas.

[01:32:30.660 --> 01:32:58.580] Smaller population, because there are fewer people to convince, will filter less hard. So you, if you go into like a discord or like a group shot, the ideas that can float around and that and get accepted are going to be much more extreme. Yeah. In both directions, it's going to be worse and better. And so like the way society is, well, when it's functioning well, is organized in this kind of hub and spokes kind of form where you're having the fringes, where you have like the research labs or their solitary researchers.

[01:32:59.500 --> 01:33:27.640] Then they're having some idea in the fringe where there's no filtering, where the ideas are allowed to be extreme and in all directions. Like pace layers. Similar idea. Yeah, exactly. And then the cat gets passed on to like a scene where it gets filtered a little bit and improved by them and then it gets passed on to bigger and bigger populations. So therefore, like almost all the good ideas needs to start out in the friendship, because if in the middle, it would be censored. In the middle, it wouldn't catch on.

[01:33:28.080 --> 01:33:50.140] And of course, we can all be in the center and the fringes at the same time and go back and forth. But yes, we need the fringes. We need to protect these spaces where people are allowed to become radicalized and allowed to have extremely bad ideas. And the Internet, by the way, I should add, is in theory really good for this, but in practice kind of actually bad for this? Yeah. Hard to tell.

[01:33:50.300 --> 01:34:19.600] I think Nadia, who you interviewed, Nadia Asperhova, made like an interesting point in her book, Antimimetics, where she talks about like the evolution of the Internet like you had. Until like 2016 or whatever, there was this gradual centralizing force towards social media. And then, of course, that blew up in massive, crazy ways. And then you've had this gradual trickle into group chats. And what God does is sort of supercharging nomadic evolution.

[01:34:19.960 --> 01:34:42.260] Because you're having people connected to the main population to the big group on Twitter or whatever. But then there are like taking ideas from there, taking them into the group chats and then having very rapid evolution of ideas in this radicalized setting and then spawning them back out. So we're getting actually this kind of amplifier of natural selection when you do it in laboratories.

[01:34:42.260 --> 01:35:09.300] So like when you're in a laboratory and you're having a bacteria and you want to have maybe have it evolve certain characteristics. Right. Then the way to do that is to accelerate the rate of natural evolution. You can change the topology of the groups. If you put everything in a big blob in the middle, it's going to be very slow for that group to adapt.

[01:35:09.300 --> 01:35:37.260] But if you instead like make these hubs and spokes where you have these smaller things that I described on the sides, then that structure is called like an amplifier of natural selection. Because if it's you structurally precisely right, you can like dial up the speed of evolution. And it could be argued. I'm not sure that's the case. Now what's happening on the internet is that we've now with group chats like dialed up the rate of evolution by having these like evolutionary breeding lagoons.

[01:35:37.260 --> 01:36:01.780] Where you're having like a most like bizarre mutations in group chats. And like then they're getting spawned back into the feed and that goes forth and it goes into different group chats. And I guess that depends on like how much time spent people spend in group chats versus the feed and so on. I really find that to be a very interesting idea, generally speaking, that we can by thinking about the structure of our networks.

[01:36:02.080 --> 01:36:30.060] By like altering the connections in the network in a delivered way, you can steer the evolution of ideas in that network. You can like make a network that is producing more ideas faster by just changing who talks to do. It feels like we could do so interesting things with that on the internet. Like having, because now we're just having these big blobs. But like if we could create these more structured spaces. Are you not building something that could be the very early?

[01:36:30.200 --> 01:36:56.140] You talked about like a blog being like your like little room. It's like your little cafe on the internet. And as you build, maybe it starts off as like a little book club. And as it scales, it becomes more of a cafe or a church or I don't know what the right metaphor is. The notion that there are sort of various coalitions of probably necessarily in the modern internet, like personality led clusters. I don't know.

[01:36:56.280 --> 01:37:25.260] There's the Venkatesh Rao part of the island and the Hendrik part of the island and Nadia and so on. I think so. And then obviously like there are many tools for this, like Discord and Substack has their own like chat apps. And then I use like the chat with the people of art like behind the paywall. I still think we lack the proper tools, but I can't figure out like what would be the correct shape for this. It's because it's a very tricky thing of like you want to have high hierarchy in these days.

[01:37:25.440 --> 01:37:50.300] And you're questioning at that. Like there's a hierarchy like around my blog where I am sort of the alpha male of my blog and I have much more reach and I can affect that community much more than anyone else. But I think we need to have more, some better few tools for creating hierarchies because how to put this, but like people are going to contribute at different levels.

[01:37:50.300 --> 01:38:20.100] And the problem like with the open comment section, for example, is that it tends to like drag quality a little bit down because people, yeah, certain people we very like reaching out and want to connect. And they might not be the people that should have, you want to have them there, but maybe they are not the ones that should be front and center. But when they start commenting because they are trying to reach out, they don't have any friends, maybe then the more people that could contribute more feel like this is maybe amateur hour.

[01:38:20.320 --> 01:38:49.540] I'm not going to contribute there. And then they instant email me. So I have like the interesting conversations, also email instead of in the comments. You hosted an event and you pulled like the actually interesting people into a back room afterwards or the after party or whatever. And there has to be some structure where like the main conversation is maybe backed by the people who are having like the most high quality conversations or like where you have a hierarchy. But I don't know what the structure of that is. And it's probably going to be controversial for some people that you're ranking people.

[01:38:49.720 --> 01:39:14.300] But I think it's important that you can control those things, the flow of information. And we don't really have the right tools or that it's not easy to do. I think it's quite interesting that we have a very good structure for the very like vertical, like creator audience relationship. And we have very good, like wide open egalitarian kind of like horizontal.

[01:39:14.880 --> 01:39:43.940] But yeah, there's very little resolution in that space between in the like vertical and the horizontal. Maybe you write wrote about and I'm using space in a different way here, but like like almost like air gaps in time between publishing work. You said, I expect that many of my friends who write and publish rapidly are shortchanging themselves. They generate text filled with hidden doors and move on before they've opened them. Another metaphor that I use is that my drafts are rooms I go to when I want to think.

[01:39:44.120 --> 01:40:13.320] And when I publish, I throw away the key, keep the key for a little while. Say more about that. It's that forest of confusion again. When I write the first draft of something and ideally the first draft of it is just nil to myself in my journal. That's just me exposing what I already think. That's like, that's usually basically a tide, right? That's basically, this is already what I think about.

[01:40:13.320 --> 01:40:38.760] But then so the next step for me is to what I'm saying there with the hidden doors. It's like once I have that thing on the table, I'll notice first like some open questions or some things that do not fit. And if I just publish it and move on, I'm not actually going to get the real value from that draft. Because the real value is when I go like, this isn't really making sense.

[01:40:38.960 --> 01:41:05.840] And like, maybe I need to go and do some more research or maybe I should go talk to this person or whatever. And I start smashing it to pieces. It's in that process where I'm actually updating how I think, how I actually, yeah, get closer contact. I guess my assumption was that what you described totally makes sense. It's sort of like a piece is 80% there and you could publish it, but like you have an itch or something.

[01:41:06.080 --> 01:41:35.180] Like, I guess my assumption, and maybe this is naive, was like you're sort of, you have things that you're like, this is good. And I'm going to hold it. Yeah. I'm going to put it in there. You talk about holding things for a year, which my sense is probably closer to the previous example, but. But it's, that's the part is also true because. And it comes back to, well, there's something about my brain that when I publish something, it's like gone from my life. Which is that metaphor, right?

[01:41:35.600 --> 01:42:04.040] It's, it's, and I, that sucks a little bit because like, it means I, I can almost like never like rest on my laurels, so to speak. Like, cause whenever I write a good essay, like I'm putting in hard work, I'm like, yeah, I'm finally going to shoot something and then I publish it. Okay. Now I have nothing. That's the feeling, right? And I never get to like feel like, oh, I've built such body of work. Like that's never how it feels to me. It's always like, well, that, I, I wish I had that interesting room.

[01:42:04.200 --> 01:42:25.240] I was hanging out it and now I've abandoned it. And now I need to build, find some other interesting room that will make me come alive. So, so they are valuable to hold for the half reason, because it's like nice to have a nice room that I can hang in. It's almost selfish. Yeah. Yeah. And, and also because when I am in that room, I am thinking about things that are valuable to me.

[01:42:25.680 --> 01:42:54.540] That way of framing certain ideas, those stories are putting me in a mind state where I, I am able to like get closer to certain things that I, that are meaningful in my life. If I'm writing an essay about my kids, I'm going to be a more present father during that project. Right. And then as soon as I closed that door, I'm, I would have usually become a better father than I was before, but I'm, I'm even better.

[01:42:55.060 --> 01:43:24.840] It's like an active lens. You, you write somewhere about like writing about things almost like, butchering it, but like pulling the world into you or something. Yeah. And it's like, you've got like a vacuum or I don't know what the right word is. You got a lens that is, or an aperture that is like sucking in all that stuff. And to take it off, there's, there is both one, something great about that because it's being compressed and offered, but there's something locked. Yeah. I really, my, my, my, my thought was going to be like, man, I really worry if you write a book. Why?

[01:43:24.840 --> 01:43:50.720] Because a book is this experience, but like in a much more totalizing way. Like I just spent a year on this. I mean, presumably if you were to write a book, it would have to be something that was so, so foundational, something you could have written 50 essays about or something. And so like, I imagine something akin to far less extreme, but akin to a mother seeing their child go off to college or something. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Definitely. And, and, and yeah.

[01:43:50.800 --> 01:44:16.680] And if you spend a year or three years on a project, it's going to be a part of your life. Like that was when my kids learned to bike and I'd like, everything is in that book. Yeah. Yeah. I, I, I am not born on a book. So, so well, I don't know, but I think the thing that is to some degree, like the core is not right. It's just like, it's sort of a meditative practice. Like, cause if you meditate, you're going to put yourself in a certain state.

[01:44:16.840 --> 01:44:40.820] And as you say, the, the, the, the NASA people that were sitting in a deprivation tank, they get out, they see the flowers. The essays are like that for me, right? If I spend some time writing about my kids, I go out and then I notice everything about them. And that's very lovely. And I get to like prime my own mind. Yes. Yes. Yes. Toward both being more present and also like understanding at a deeper level.

[01:44:41.420 --> 01:45:07.380] And, and the presence kind of goes away after the project, but, but, but the deeper insight stays. Hmm. Priming your own mind is really, really wonderful way of putting why some creative thing might be worth, worth it, independent of anything else. You wrote, I'm shouting at myself here briefly. You wrote about Johanna reflecting on, I guess she was reading the transcript of, of my interview with Nadia.

[01:45:07.500 --> 01:45:30.540] And she asked you like, are we making a mistake being so isolated? Um, we could be people who go to dinners and talk to interesting people and go, whatever, have these conversations. You've said elsewhere, uh, you really, really love talking to people. Um, and for what it's worth, we, we have the internet. Um, you, you, you have a great binary in that way. Do you get lonely? No. No.

[01:45:30.840 --> 01:46:00.800] Is it maybe a better question would be, is it, do you, do you worry at all about the pressure of one person being so foundational to how you can think aloud? And, and I, and I don't mean it in like, she's not enough. Like clearly you've talked, we talked last time about the ways that you're compounding into the 20,000 hours or whatever, but just the, it's a lot to hold. No, that, that is, that is something Johanna and I talk about.

[01:46:00.800 --> 01:46:19.940] And it's maybe even more acute for her than for me, because, uh, like if I, we talk about the, like, but if I were to like be hit by a bus, right? Like, I am, we're homeschooling together and well, like with the first, I am the sold income and like, like her life would be very, very, very difficult to have that happen.

[01:46:20.100 --> 01:46:48.200] And, and, um, and so it's important, like both to like plan for that eventuality or, but that could happen, but also like to make sure that like, uh, she has her own things and her own social network that she can rely on in those situations. And that's also true for me. Uh, but, but it's like a little bit easier for me since I like naturally, uh, end up having a lot of connections with people through the writing. And so I have collaborators and friends. Yeah.

[01:46:48.260 --> 01:47:18.020] It's always good to have multiple lives to stand on. But then as you say, like, it is something we like think about, uh, all the time, like, should we, would it be better for us to be in a city and be surrounded with like more of a scene? I think it's like valuable to like try to weigh these things. Like, how are we constructing the context environment around ourselves? Like, cause like when we made a decision where we live now, we didn't think we would ever like earn any money. We were, we wanted a homeschool. So it had to be cheap.

[01:47:18.120 --> 01:47:46.560] Like, and now we can see about like maybe we could actually live in a city and actually afford a homeschool. And like, so maybe we should update. Yeah. It's important to like go through these. Like, so now that the situation is different, like, does it still make sense for us to live on a cheat farm on an island or not? And I think where we have landed on that is that, yes, it does make sense for us because the way we're sort of wired. Uh, and I mean, we have, we like the local community there.

[01:47:46.800 --> 01:48:14.520] We like nature and especially we just like to have a lot of time on our own. A lot of space. Come back to it. Because I remember like when we lived in the city, yes. Like both of us, but especially me, I'm just like a yes man. Like if I, I remember like, I was just, I knew everyone in town, right? Like I couldn't go through the city because it was this, oops, this is like a city of 200,000. I couldn't go through the city without like running into someone else. And it was always getting dragged into cafes and then there'll be a party.

[01:48:14.900 --> 01:48:44.720] Like, I can't say no to things. I like, there's so many exciting things and I'm always talking. So yeah, I constrain myself. Like I'm in this place. And because when you're in the country, you have to like actively decides like where I want to go. Talk to someone. I want to travel and visit someone. And then you have to actually go through and make it priorities. Like who am I actually, would I actually like to spend more time with and so on. And I like to be, have to be deliberate about my choices left out. I think there's a thing here that I've thought a lot about, which is like,

[01:48:46.300 --> 01:49:11.980] life is a constant fight against inertia. And the point isn't to just change things, but the point is to build a, and I think this is something you do really well across so many of these contexts we've spoken about, which is just build a habit of reevaluating. I think most, most of us, the temptation is like, I don't know if I can make a change. I don't know if I can make a change. It's why we're so hesitant, by the way, to unfold and explore the possibility of something else. And then if we do make the change, it's like, all right, now this has to be how it is.

[01:49:12.080 --> 01:49:38.260] And it's like, maybe it comes back to a lightness or a loose grip or something that is not about a lack of conviction, but a openness to the thing that was true for me then very well might still be true for me. And it could change in a year. And that could be true about the work or the, where you live or much smaller things. But it's, it's like, there's a tension. There's a temptation to just hold. Once you get something, just hold it. Keep holding it. Let the energy.

[01:49:39.420 --> 01:50:08.780] I find that meeting new people is a very good way of unclenching that fist. Especially with, if they are like, curious agentic people who are like doing different things and are like, yeah, made a little bit disagreeable can push on you. It's the spheres. Yeah, yeah, exactly. And, and, and, and it's fun because they're all so different. Like, so I have like different people who are like, I don't know, mentors, peers, whatever to call them.

[01:50:08.780 --> 01:50:37.580] But with people like Tranchi for perspectives, advice. And they say like, their opinions go in completely like different directions. Like they're, sorry, again, I get confused by talking to like one, I'll be super excited. Because I also always want to do the thing that whoever I talk to say. So it's very good for me to have people who are like saying the opposite thing. Yeah. Because that just like blows my head open and I get confused and then I can like maybe, maybe I'll do, I'll try a little bit of that and a little bit of that or something in between.

[01:50:37.900 --> 01:51:03.260] I think I've relied, I used to rely a lot on solitude for that work. And now I have the luxury of relying more on peers because I found people who can do that to my mind. Previously, like the people I had access to were maybe not. Right, right. Yeah. Prining me in the right way. They were maybe a little bit too conservative. So then I would have to retreat into solitude, which might be the best thing.

[01:51:03.360 --> 01:51:21.840] But it's also sometimes I find that solitude is like, it's maybe slower, but better. And sometimes I just want to make fast people or make fast decisions. Then they have to just talk to three different people. I think you want to cycle through the different modes too. Yeah. Something quick, but I just really liked it.

[01:51:21.840 --> 01:51:51.060] You talked about good and bad consumption and another kind of theme of this, the space theme showing up and how certain art or information or content perhaps can be good consumption. And certain can be bad. Maybe it's a little obtuse. But the essence of it being about how close you feel to yourself. You say, Johanna and I sometimes open a page in an art book and look at it for 10 minutes. We can't do it for much longer than that.

[01:51:52.000 --> 01:52:21.720] Paintings, unlike reading the internet, spit us back out after a while. And despite having allowed ourselves to get completely absorbed by something external, when we close the art book, we feel more attuned to ourselves. And you go on to talk about Philip Glass and the way he thinks about composing music for films and leaving space versus the internet. Most parts of the internet or maybe a TV series or something where there are certain forms of art where you come out of it. Maybe it's really engaging, but you come out of it and you don't really feel super close to yourself.

[01:52:21.900 --> 01:52:45.120] And then other forms of art where you're, as I read you, almost like it's about this. It has enough space for you to put yourself into it. What are the patterns of the art that to you, I mean, obviously part of this is just the mediums as you allude to in the painting. But what are the patterns of the types of art that has this kind of space, at least for you, that makes you really learn about yourself or get closer to yourself?

[01:52:46.940 --> 01:53:14.860] Well, I think, um, is it Amps on the top spell, like the seven types of ambiguity? Because I think that's, that's one way to think about it. It's the type of art I'm talking about has ambiguity. It has space. There's some, it's, it's not reaching closure in itself. Like converter, like a field pass next to a stage of the game, like a commercial. It's like a perfectly close, like everything fits together. And the, right. And the message is like super clear. It's like propaganda. Yeah. Yeah.

[01:53:14.960 --> 01:53:38.060] The propaganda commercials, like they know exactly what they want you to feel and there's, everything is designed for that message that there's like, no, they don't want you to. No interpretation. Yeah. Whereas like when you, you start removing things and like creating some, uh, space for interpretation, the, the viewer has to fill those spaces to make the artwork meaningful.

[01:53:38.060 --> 01:54:06.900] So, so, so, so like famously Shakespeare, when you read, uh, the place, they are often based on like historical things that have actually happened. And, and, and often if you compare what actually happened to what he writes, he's gone through and like removed the motivations for behaviors. So like you, you actually, you know, like, you, you actually, in the historical record, we know exactly why that person did that thing. But he goes through and like deletes that. Totally.

[01:54:07.780 --> 01:54:33.200] Because then, because then you have like, why is he, you know, killing his wife or whatever? You don't know that. And when you don't know there's, everyone can like project different things in it and, and, and different actors can play this place in different ways. And there's like so much space for, for, for, for reflections and emotions to be pushed into Shakespeare's work, which wouldn't have been there if, if we knew exactly how to interpret it.

[01:54:33.480 --> 01:55:02.880] That's often the case that the one there's those things that you need to fill with yourself, then, then in that act of filling in yourself, the way you feel it is by listening inward. Like, so why do I think he killed his wife? Like, I noticed the way he turned his head. I think he was lying there, blah, blah, blah. And, and, and the thing you're attuning to there is yourself. Yeah. And so, so therefore, but, but, but it also spits you out because like, if you've ever read like Shakespeare, it's, it's like, it's hard work.

[01:55:03.640 --> 01:55:32.040] It's, it's, it's, because it's like, you have to stop at every other line and fill in. I'm like, what does that word mean? And like, how should I interpret that? So it's like exhausting to fill in now, to, to read, uh, ambiguous work compared to like propaganda or like Twitter or something where there's less of that. And, uh, so it has those like twin things of like, it will spit you out because you'll get tired and then you'll just lean back in the sofa and like, I'm just gonna be with myself now.

[01:55:32.040 --> 01:55:55.880] But you will also be close to yourself because you have been half forced to pull from yourself. That's my read on what is happening in those situations where, where piece of art or piece of writing, uh, brings speedy back to myself. I love the spitting out because it's such a great way to articulate the thing that is, has friction.

[01:55:55.880 --> 01:56:20.220] And that, by the way, the, the majority of incentives in culture today are incentivizing all media to not have that affect. If you really think about like people talk about people reading less, like one of my favorite ideas is that a reading is a co-collaborative act more, more so than most other mediums we spent a lot of time with today. Obviously painting is an extreme example on the other end, but a reading read like no person reads the same book.

[01:56:21.160 --> 01:56:45.560] I have to put myself into, and maybe a truly remarkable novelist or whatever is really good at projecting something very specific, but. We usually are the other way around. You should, you know, we usually see the scale as with Shakespeare, as with Kafka, the skill is removing. Yes. As it's, it's, it's almost like this game of like, what is it called? Like there's this game where you have like these blocks and. Jenga. Is that, yeah.

[01:56:46.380 --> 01:57:15.880] And like a good, uh, knowledge or something is someone who can pull the Jenga box and build it really, really high. And it's like, how could that even stat? Yes. But it's somehow still stand. Which by the way, it's no surprise that many of these worlds we, we adore so much are the ones that you can put yourself into and imagine yourself in. Yeah. So, so whereas like weak, weak writers can do like build a very compact thing where there's a whole set. Jenga block of, of narrative writing. That's the USA. So.

[01:57:16.400 --> 01:57:44.840] I like that. I like that a lot. But, but he, something that, okay. Again, another thought is like on the edge of my, my thinking is what you're saying, because there's a very strong incentives. Uh, today it to, to write in, in ways that feel all the holds to break propaganda to write like these obvious things. If you look at what's trending on sub stack or whatever your assets. Yeah. Yeah.

[01:57:45.060 --> 01:58:10.860] It's, it's all like these, these cliches that get like filled up with, but fluff words and just like reinforcing what people ought to think. There's no space to, to fill in that. And, and, and I noticed that myself. Like, um, if I, if I use, if I were to use like the techniques that Kafka or Shakespeare use, like of, of making things like gnarly and like hard to interpret and, and the ways they did it.

[01:58:10.860 --> 01:58:39.300] I wouldn't have any readers as there's like a tension because I want to provide that space. But at the same time, I, in order to have readers, I need to make my writing very clear, very easy to read on your phone on the toilet. Yeah. And like the very, like if it's going to spit you out, it needs to be very easy to get into. Yeah. Uh, and, and there's an obvious tension because the easiest way to make something that is ambiguous is to reflect sort of more like modernist poetry or something.

[01:58:39.300 --> 01:59:07.240] But, but that I'm not, but again, it's like a constraint. I'm not allowed to use those tricks. I'm not allowed to like, Mary's duties. If, uh, elliptical kind of brain and, and the tension is like, how do I write something that is on the surface, very clear, very easy to read, almost like a Twitter article. Uh, and at the same time opens those spaces. Uh, I'm not sure I always succeed, but, but that's, I think it's an interesting challenge.

[01:59:07.240 --> 01:59:34.960] It's like, without using obscure language. Yes. Yes. Can I use simple sentences? Subversion though. It's finding some way for subversion. Yeah. And I've been thinking of someone like Hemingway does that well. Very simple sentence. Maybe some of his sentences are obscure, but, but it's quite simple language and somehow it still creates these things. But yeah. Well, you, you talk about this a little bit when you talk about like the biggest topics can be really boring to write about. It's not, it's not exactly the same idea.

[01:59:35.300 --> 02:00:04.920] And like the trick is like, how do you, how do you talk about these sort of things that people are so real romance or whatever, figuring out how to do it? Like, how do you talk about these things in a fresh way? Cause that is so electrifying, but it's so hard to get there. Cause the temptation is to just make it overly obscure or overly basic. Yeah. Yeah. Again, it's, it's, it's, um, one way I think about it is sort of like, yes, if you're. Playing jazz or something, you want to.

[02:00:06.220 --> 02:00:35.600] You can like, when they're playing jazz, they'll take some like classic chord progression and then they're improvising on top of it and adding like disc harmonies on top of it. And like, can you, can you like a lot of it is just like taking. Like, I mean, something that's quite kind of simple and the padding, these interesting juxtapositions and interesting shifts in it. Like bringing in, like, if I write about like love or emotions, it's interesting to like, I'll bring in some Polstoy and some machine learning. Like, cause there's like from different domains.

[02:00:35.740 --> 02:00:52.940] And if I can like weave them together. Yeah. Uh, I can write them quite simply. I can say a few simple things about machine learning, a few simple things about Polstoy, but the way they kind of clash produces this kind of, these resonances that are bigger.

[02:00:52.940 --> 02:01:22.580] Uh, and so, so, and I think that that's one way I try to like create these spaces, like while using simple leverage by, by, by like juxtapositioning ideas from different fields and, and so on. And then another good thing about is that I've found is that it helps bridge those domains. So I have a lot of my readers who are like programmers and they can then maybe resonate and understand what Tolstoy is already in the world. Yeah.

[02:01:22.680 --> 02:01:51.220] Cause, cause you're, you're connecting that and then vice versa. Right. So, so it's valuable. You know, which is. There is a thread that I find myself coming to maybe two words that stand out. Um, one is sort of, and I realize this one's especially, uh, hard to pin down, but like something towards like being true, being true to yourself, being true to your feeling. The other word is conviction.

[02:01:51.460 --> 02:02:16.180] Um, and one of the points that I read your kind of like big essay on agency, it kind of culminates in this. My, my takeaway was like agency is basically actually about your values and your desires and like taking a stand. And like, if you have enough conviction, agency is actually quite easy. You, you, uh, I think it's at the end of the piece and it's very, very powerful. You're writing about mod.

[02:02:16.340 --> 02:02:44.900] You say the reason having mod in my life made me more agentic was that it was the first time I experienced what it means to surrender to my values. I had a lot of idiosyncratic opinions and values when I was younger too, but I held them in a rather flimsy way. Whenever things got too hard or people disapproved of what I was doing, I tended to give up and do the normal thing instead. If I had experienced it before mod, I would have caved in after 30 seconds. But in this case, caving in was unforgivable. I must never fail mod.

[02:02:48.140 --> 02:03:12.280] Um, I don't mean to, um, trivialize it. Uh, but in the, in the cases of like, that's such a powerful example. And it's also like, it's an impenetrable example in the cases that are maybe like less biological. Um, where do you think this type of conviction comes from? Maybe this relates a little bit to our conversation about desire and a more serious way.

[02:03:14.720 --> 02:03:37.140] Um, maybe this is also what I'm pointing out when I talk about like this trueness and search of trueness. Yes. Let's stay with conviction. Um, I think, I think that can probably come from multiple directions. I mean, it's personal people. That's just easier. They're kind of disagreeable people and it comes easy.

[02:03:37.700 --> 02:04:01.640] Uh, for me, as you said, it was like having kids and like feeling that I had to stand up for them and act on that, which, and the good thing about that was, it was sort of happy duration in the good sense that I, but being forced to stand up for my convictions.

[02:04:01.640 --> 02:04:29.560] I, I had to like go through this entire process of, of the pain of doing what I wanted to do. And I came out on the other end and I was like, that's kind of okay. And so it was like, again, some of it's like being held by the hand or like being forced. It's like going into the Marines or something. Like you get forced to do more sit-ups than you've ever done in your life. And you realize I can actually do that. And it can probably be in different ways.

[02:04:29.560 --> 02:04:52.100] It can be like, I guess like a lot of being in a like startup incubator can be like that too. Like you get these external pressures. Like you have to live up to your mentors and people are even less than you. And that kind of social pressure forces you to do things that are uncomfortable for you. It's like a constructed stakes. Yeah. So, so, so I think, yeah, having investors, having kids, like there are different ways across our indoor states.

[02:04:52.100 --> 02:05:16.060] Another way of like securing your conviction or acting on what you believe that's been used a lot historically is like to say that, like, if I do not do this, I betray God. I wrote that down. You said, um, thinking of the work in religious terms as a service to or a search for God. Bergman, Grothendieck and Pascal all do this.

[02:05:16.160 --> 02:05:42.260] It might be easier to summon the awe and daring necessary to push out into the unknown and against social pressure if the alternative is failing God or a fetish muse. Yeah. So, and, and, and, and I mean, that's, that's, if we're going to be like, I'm atheist. So I'm going to be like very like crass about what, what that mental move is doing is just like hijacking or a conformity bias. Like we, we have a tendency to like want to bow our heads to authority.

[02:05:42.260 --> 02:06:11.540] And then if you just like invent an authority, which is all seeing and all powerful, and then you give them your idolized values, then there's a hijacking your innate drive to like submit to authority or to like fit in. So you're kind of hijacking that kind of a monkey brain thing we have. I mean, I mean, one shouldn't explain that because it works less well if you understand that that's what you're doing.

[02:06:11.540 --> 02:06:36.850] I, I, I, I struggle to do that myself since I like, I don't believe in God. And so then I, I would know that I was like tricking myself. I was just using God as a prop. What do you believe in? That's a good question. I believe. Um, it's something like maybe something like that.

[02:06:38.490 --> 02:07:03.170] We all, it sounds cliche, but like we all have something we can contribute to. Like we, the universe itself is just so extraordinary. Like with everything like quantum particles and black balls and evolution. It's just like, we get come here and explore and take part in this unfolding creation. And that's just like. So remarkable and so big in itself.

[02:07:03.170 --> 02:07:20.450] And then on top of that, because of like the accident of your genetics and the place you're born, there's going to be certain things that will only be possible for you. Like there would be certain things that only you will be in a position to care for.

[02:07:20.450 --> 02:07:46.350] And, and, and so I'm not sure why, but for some reason it feels imperative to me that like you should protect and like be a guardian of that possibility. And like, make sure that you leave the universe at like better place that, that you are like, ah, maybe sort of forced toward higher complexity.

[02:07:46.350 --> 02:08:05.770] That like, when you leave the planet, like the fight against entropy has like been one, like civilization is a little bit more coherent. Like the, we have better theories of the world. We have richer relationships where more diversity and perspectives. I don't know.

[02:08:05.890 --> 02:08:33.870] It's like, but being a force for like, whereas it feels, it would be super boring if the universe was just like rocks floating in dead space. And it like, because that wouldn't have as much complexity as biobotical evolution. So you just like being the force for increasing the complexity, something like that. Is it fulfilled potential? Is that too simple? Yeah. That's, that's a good way of simplifying it down.

[02:08:33.870 --> 02:08:58.790] But, but, but not only for yourself. It's because I am not like you're, I am not all that important in myself. Of course, I value myself because I get to live in my, I have to live in my body. But, but what matters more to me is just, it's continual unfolding that like my ancestors and they're all behind me.

[02:08:58.790 --> 02:09:28.470] And like, how can I play a part in this like ongoing evolution dance and like make sure that it's, it's like we're in, in this big jam session. And like, how do I make sure that like when I leave the stage, the, the, like the song is in a music was going on, kept going. Yeah. Yeah. And was hopefully like going in an even better direction because people around you had to grow and were playing more interesting things and so on. We talked about this a bit last time, but it is being a good steward of being sentenced to freedom.

[02:09:28.470 --> 02:09:53.430] That's how I hear it a little bit. You were, you were writing about a, a Spigniew Herbert, forgive my pronunciation, um, and ethics and talking about how ethics is care and not something an external authority demands of you. It's not a list of commands you follow. And you, you also spoke about, uh, with David Perel about like this kind of hard and soft together.

[02:09:53.490 --> 02:10:21.170] So like, uh, being open or porous, I think that maybe was his language and also very firm at the same time in the, in Herbert essay, you said, you have to see the world for what it is in all its brutality. And you need to do this while keeping your heart soft for the beauty that makes it all worthwhile. Maybe you could replace hard and soft with like bravery and openness. Does that resonate with you? Is there anything in that thread that resonates? Yeah.

[02:10:21.270 --> 02:10:49.450] I think that's part of it, but it's, it's interesting when we have these conversations because it's all the same topic all the way through. Um, because the reason you need to be both hard and soft when interfacing with the world is that, uh, the world, it can be quite horrendous place. There's like many things big and small are terrible.

[02:10:49.860 --> 02:11:16.870] And you want to see them with clear eyes. Cause you want to see all of reality as cleanly as you can. Like, um, and, and we don't have to think about like the big, horrible things, but just like in your life, um, in a relationship, like you, you want to be able to see the ways you are failing as a father or husband. You want to see the fridges. You want to be able to like sit with those uncomfortable things.

[02:11:17.750 --> 02:11:44.090] Uh, and that requires a certain hardness. I don't know if that's the right word, but it requires a certain like, um, non naivete or certain forcefulness and strength. And just like facing these painful things because, uh, unless you can't, can do that, you're not going to see reality clearly. And if you, you're not seeing reality clearly, you're not going to be able to short. Yes.

[02:11:44.270 --> 02:12:10.370] The most ethical, good, interesting path for the labyrinth. And, um, but you also need to be soft. And the reason soft is gesturing out is that, um, thing that is going to guide, guide you through this world. So, so it's the hardness is letting you see the labyrinth, letting you see the world, but it's not telling you where to go.

[02:12:10.370 --> 02:12:29.990] And the softness is what tells you where to go because you also, at the same time. Yes. Because the risk, the risk if you're just very hard is that you get like stoical and you just close down and you're tense and like the world is terrible place. I'm not going to trust anyone, whatever. And, and that's not going to help you navigate. Yeah.

[02:12:30.150 --> 02:12:57.310] Also at the same time, I have to get back to that galloping down the road, being playful, being soft, because it's, it's those like small intuitions from the inside, what feels alive, what feels good. That is going to guide you, uh, where you should walk in this reality test. And we've talked about it in terms of creative work, that it's, uh, connecting to these 12 senses that, that lets you do good creative work.

[02:12:57.310 --> 02:13:23.630] But it's also true in all the mates, right? When we were having, when you're having a conversation, it's, it's that ability to like feel inside yourself when something is right. That's gonna, uh, if you can tap into that, be vulnerable with that and share that that's gonna make the conversation come alive. So it's the same thing as with creative work.

[02:13:23.970 --> 02:13:51.310] And, and, and I think it's the same thing if you're designing a house or if you're building a company or whatever. Cause like, I noticed like when, when I was mentioned that I didn't believe in God, you, you, you, you got curious there and you stopped and you went off script and asking, so what do you believe in? That was sort of, cause you were genuinely curious about that. And, and it felt like there was a little bit of an opening up in the conversation when that happens. And like, there's been several of those in the conversation here.

[02:13:52.150 --> 02:14:16.950] So, and, and so yes, you want to be both hard and soft. If we like, there's no great words for it, but like need to see it be stoical enough so you can see reality and like shyness and playful enough. So you can decide how to walk in through that world. And they are not easy to combine. Yeah. It's like assertive and receptive. I was going to say the same thing. It's so, I mean, I, you brought it up.

[02:14:17.050 --> 02:14:44.670] Like even this, what I do is so hard to, and there's, I could, I could do this show with no notes and I could just like be maximally receptive. And like, we would probably have a pretty generative conversation and I should probably try more of that. But I also don't think we would cover as much ground and I tend to drift and whatever. And I could also just come and like read off a teleprompter and it's so hard. And obviously all wonder comes, and that's a trivial example, but everything good comes from that marriage.

[02:14:45.210 --> 02:15:11.430] But it's, it's like, it's this balance again. It's like, can I, can I stay right in the middle of this, like asserting receiving? Yeah, but so much of it, it feels like we're coming back again and again to sort of, um, phenomenology of navigating in murky spaces. It's like, how, how, how does, how does this post your feel in the body? What kind of rules of thumb?

[02:15:11.530 --> 02:15:40.190] How are you going to put your feet and how are you going to feel inside where to go? And, and it's, yeah, it feels like basically everything good talks about like different aspects of, of that, those felt senses. I think that's, that's one of the, the kind of primary readings I have of your work, um, is, is something that you are not always staring directly at, but you are, you are circling around.

[02:15:40.190 --> 02:16:09.720] And one of the reasons I find the writing to be beyond beautiful or compelling or entertaining, but to be useful, um, is I think that's a worthy, worthy thing to pursue. I have a few more things, a couple of just quick miscellaneous things. Your essays are short. Um, very, very readable in a very, in a way that must be quite deliberate, I guess, is my reaction.

[02:16:09.720 --> 02:16:37.540] Even compared to other things on Substack. Yeah, they'd gotten shorter. I think I used to sort of average 4,000 words. Now I probably average 2,000 words. I think two, that's a nice length. It's like enough that you can do it in one sitting. I think I used to be more like allowing us to sprawl everywhere, but just like, I want to make sure that each essay is its own little small room and like not having.

[02:16:37.540 --> 02:17:04.300] I used, cause if I look at my mold dresses, they are actually like three groups cut together. And because I didn't feel like it was enough. Yeah. And just like trusting that this one thing is enough. Yeah. Uh, so, and also simplifying. It's like, I prune my writing a lot. Like I, I, I, yeah. When I read a lot of other writers, there's much more fluff and that can be good because it can be a way off.

[02:17:05.220 --> 02:17:34.520] Like when it's done well, it can be a way of like putting you in a state more because you, they repeating the same idea from different perspectives over and over again. But I try to keep it a little bit more trimmed to maybe hopefully, well, hopefully it's easier to get through it, but also leave some more space to it. Cause I think most people obviously just read through my essays very rapidly and that's probably, hopefully a pleasant experience.

[02:17:35.160 --> 02:18:04.040] But I try to make them so that if you slow down and actually like, what would this mean if I applied it to my life? How does disconnect? What does this actually mean? That there was actually a lot to unpack, even though the sentences are like written in a way that it should flow very easily. But I say, I want, yeah, it's again, that that will lead. Yeah. Yeah. It's the Jenga tower too. Yeah. I want to be, you should just be able to scroll through it and read it and be short, but you should also be able to read it. I mean, I have, some people have told me that they've read seven of my essays like 50 times.

[02:18:04.040 --> 02:18:22.780] And, and, and, and, and, and, and that's wonderful. If you can create something that people can come back to and see, there's more and more layers to it. How's reading like running? Reading is like running in that it is, well, it's a skill.

[02:18:23.020 --> 02:18:50.320] It's, it's, um, to be able to run, you need to build up many parts of your body, your muscles in your legs, your heart. Uh, if you want to be a good runner, you have to like develop your mental wellness and understanding of, you know, you, you taught me about like the pacing and things like that. Um, so there's this whole thing. Like if you're going to run a marathon, it's just like, you're not just going to go out and do it.

[02:18:50.400 --> 02:19:19.360] You have to, you have become the kind of person that can run a marathon. Right. And that takes six months at least probably several years. And the same thing is true. Writing, uh, reading, uh, and right. Uh, but reading. And I think a lot of people kind of misunderstand that because they, they, they can read a little bit and then they think like, oh, this is the year. But I can't really, uh, and I'm like, I'm going to do Alicarendra. And it's like, that's like saying, I'm going to do a marathon on my first training run. Right.

[02:19:19.980 --> 02:19:46.180] And everyone runs too fast and too far when they start. Exactly. And, and, and enough, you get the same. And it's just like trusting that you, what matters in reading is just like gradually gilding up your capacity to, to process words, your references, understanding. Like if you're reading Dante, like there's going to be references to a million things and poems going to do much better if you understand those references and so on.

[02:19:46.180 --> 02:20:13.700] Like, so, so it takes time to build up those things to, to, to actually do it. So it's like a good idea is just like to start slowly and steadily and just making it fun and, and gradually pushing yourself a little bit. Cause reading Anna Karenina is supposed to be very easy, right? It like, it's not a hard book if you are prepared for it. It's a very readable, easy book. But I remember that the first time when I was like 17, I thought it was very hard to read.

[02:20:13.940 --> 02:20:42.200] And now I read it and it was like, this is like a romance novel. It's very easy, but that's because I've built up the capacity. I think about how more and more in like all domains, I used to think, you know, it's like, you just need to explain certain ideas to people. And I think that's like a big part of why I've started writing publicly. So it's like, Oh, I figured this thing out. I should just write down how to do this thing. Right.

[02:20:42.780 --> 02:21:10.100] And then you realize that's not how it works. Right. Because like, I used to write a bunch of essays about how I write my essays. And I'm like thinking I could teach other people that way, because to me, it's obvious, like, it's actually like these things I'm doing. But obviously the reason I can write the way I write is because I've spent 15, 20 years becoming the kind of person who can write them. And there's like my entire nervous system is like been redesigned for the purpose of writing essays.

[02:21:10.760 --> 02:21:33.260] And so you probably like, if someone tried to do what I do, it'd take at least five years of like deliberate hard effort of like becoming. Because you have to like literally rewire your entire brain. And I think that's sort of underappreciated. And again, with the agency, like people say, like you can just do things.

[02:21:33.420 --> 02:21:56.960] Like, but if you are the kind of person where your parents abused you and no one's ever believed in you and you get like an intense anxiety at the thought of like putting foot forward. You can't, you can't just do things. It's going to be a very long process of like rebuilding yourself into the kind of person who can just do things.

[02:21:57.080 --> 02:22:25.680] But, but it's also a hopeful image, like, because basically everyone can run a marathon and basically everyone can become a good reader or become a good writer. You have to show up. You have to show up. You have to do it again and again for many years. And you have to like not burn out by expecting too much of yourself. But that kind of gradual increasing of strength and the literal practice. Yeah.

[02:22:26.720 --> 02:22:54.060] I found an old draft of Looking for Alice that you linked to in a footnote, a couple, a couple excerpts. Instead, I've done it by chaining myself to someone who grew weird in ways synergistic with me. And then that word unpalatable is interesting. What is palatable and what is not is often a question of context. I'm going to preface this, but this is a weird one. So I had to pull it out. A Westerner sees someone eat a dog and feels revulsion. The revulsion isn't in the dog. It is in the context.

[02:22:54.060 --> 02:23:20.080] To understand the delicacy of the dog, you must inhabit another world. That can be very hard. Maybe you figure out how to place yourself in the context where dogs are tasty and now you're munching on one. Along comes your mother. I've just had a revelation, you say. Let me tell you. But all she sees is the paw on your plate. I think love is a lot like that. I just forgot on that phone. Yeah, that was cut from that phone that I said. Why is love a lot like that?

[02:23:24.500 --> 02:23:51.910] Because love, as compared to a location or something, is a deep, knowledgeable appreciation of another person. It's like you can't love one in sort of the erring from sense of that word or something. Unless you're intimate with that person.

[02:23:52.050 --> 02:24:21.290] If you actually have looked at them and understand them. And I find personally that many of my closest relationships with people that I feel deepest love for are almost like acquired tastes. Like they're almost like... Well, it's not... That's not the strictly right way of saying it.

[02:24:21.390 --> 02:24:49.950] Like I think a lot of people fell in love with Johanna around the time when we met. Because she was very lovely in some easy to read ways. But the important part of her personality, the parts that I truly love now and that are like the core of her, they didn't see and didn't appreciate. And so it's where I'm going. It's to really deeply love someone for who they are. You have to see them very deeply.

[02:24:50.250 --> 02:25:17.140] And you have to be very... Yeah, and that requires a lot of context. And so like it's almost like acquiring the skill of loving someone. And then if you... Sometimes if you show that to someone else, it might not make sense, right? Like you take... Like let's take some very obvious example. Like say some people have an open relationship.

[02:25:17.300 --> 02:25:45.700] Because like they look deep at each other and they realize that we're totally okay with each other sleeping on other people. And that feels very beautiful and fragile and close for them. And like totally respecting each other's idiosyncratic feelings and so on. Another person might look like that and say that that seems like a very toxic way of living. And it's like, well, have you actually... Inhabited this world. Yeah. Have you actually paid attention to what we feel inside when these things happen? And that's a very obvious one.

[02:25:45.820 --> 02:26:12.620] But there's often subtle versions of that in all relationships. If you're actually allowing that relationship to grow into a shape that is fitted to the people involved. You write about authors as your friends. Authors are our friends. They are odd people who talk to us, sometimes from across the grave. When Joanna and I talk, we'll say Tomas and mean Transtroma. Pardon my pronunciation.

[02:26:12.920 --> 02:26:39.020] He is one of our mutual friends and we gossip lovingly about him. And then when I read the biographies of people, exceptional people's early lives, it feels a little bit like getting new peers. Their way of being works on me. Gradually I raise my aspirations. Who do you feel closest to in this way? It doesn't have to be an answer for all the time, but it could be current. I mean, I've been in...

[02:26:39.020 --> 02:27:06.040] I always turn to different authors at different points in my life where I'm struggling with sort of things. So like, as we talked about earlier, I've been like struggling with like, what's the next step of my creative journey? So then it's been natural for me to turn to people like Brian Eno and just like, you know, you read his diaries, you read, listen to interviews he's done and like his biography and trying to piece together how he's done it.

[02:27:06.040 --> 02:27:35.580] And that, you know, gives you some models and it feels like in some ways it's like easier for me to talk to him. Because it's like the situation I'm in right now, like it's not that many people who have been in that situation like none of my friends have. So like, it's hard to talk about these things, but I feel like I can sort of bounce against his experiences. And I don't think I'll, you know, do the same thing as he and I don't, we don't disagree.

[02:27:35.780 --> 02:28:03.080] Like, but it does feel like I can sit there and like talk with him. And I think I always have that feeling. I get this impression that a lot of people put like authors on like pedestals. And I see people even do that with myself, which is like super weird to me because like I'm, as I know, like obviously you're just like a guy. And it's like very strange when people do that. It's because I'll even see it in comments.

[02:28:03.080 --> 02:28:32.340] People write about me in like third person and as if I'm like some kind of thing. And I'm like, you are the dictator of the blog, but. Yeah, you sure I am. But, but like, but it's so strange when some people write about me as if I'm some famous person, then like the writing purpose. And I was like, I'm Peter. Like I, I'm in a room, man. Like I'm just like, I'm doing the dishes and my kids are playing. Like I'm in the room. You don't, I need to put me up there. Like, and I think the same is true for me.

[02:28:32.640 --> 02:28:59.470] And if you approach people like that, if you approach Dostoevsky like that, which you realize like they are all very Yuba. Yeah. They're all very like relatable and open in their writing, in their strange ways. And, and you can really see eye to eye with them. And, and I think it's very healthy to just bring them down. There's like nothing that, I mean, they, they, they are weird. They've gone extreme things in their lives.

[02:28:59.590 --> 02:29:27.510] They are very skilled at specific things, but they're just people. And, and they can be interesting to talk to because they have interesting experiences and they pushed further into that than many others. But, but it's, it's like nice to just like put them down here and, and play with them. You wrote about your, I think, maternal grandfather who passed away last summer. Niels, life is not a story that builds to a climax. It is a story that meanders.

[02:29:28.050 --> 02:29:54.330] Every single moment in life is as worthy of care and attention as the climax of a story. What I grieved wasn't his, Niels, worn out body finally giving up. That felt good, actually. It was relief for him. What I grieved was all the moments that were gone. Even more, I grieved all of the moments he had been alive to himself. All of the moments that no one else will ever remember. The feeling of sun on his skin.

[02:29:54.570 --> 02:30:20.900] The long nights in the snow plow clearing the roads through the pine forests. The feeling, if any, his last night when Maude the Elder held his hand. And he seemed for a moment to slide out of his dementia and to sleep and smile. It was the gone-ness of all of those moments that hurt. Are there any other moments that come to mind that you would like the world to know about Niels?

[02:30:23.130 --> 02:30:49.490] He was a very special man. Meant a lot to me. I would say he's had a very, very close relationship. Close enough people have with their grandparents, I think. He retired. He was a road worker, so he retired and he was 60. And that was the singer I was born. So he spent a lot of time sort of caring for me.

[02:30:50.710 --> 02:31:18.830] When my mom started working again, so he would come there and be with us. And so as I sort of grew up, I'm very close. He would take me camping. And he was a very down-to-earth kind of person. So those moments are usually a very important thing. And maybe not so typical for the cultural milieu that he came from. He came from very, very, very poor circumstances. He grew up without electricity.

[02:31:19.610 --> 02:31:48.530] And everyone was very martial and so on. And he was very, very, very poor. There's so many interesting things about him. There's one beautiful little story about how he was. When he was, I think he was four years old. He, on Saturdays, they would get a sugarcuk.

[02:31:50.110 --> 02:32:16.410] And they would put it over fire to make it like a caramel. And he did that. And I put it in. And then it slid down his throat so he couldn't breathe. And he was so sensitive. So he didn't want to disturb anyone. So he just went around, like, hugging his mom, his dad, his seven siblings. And then he went out, laid down on the meadow and, like, prepared to die. And then it melted and slid down.

[02:32:18.610 --> 02:32:45.030] So he was a very, very special person. And, yeah, not the most targeted person. But I'm very, very extremely determined to do well. To help people. Like, even during COVID. And at this point, I mean, he was 92 or something.

[02:32:46.170 --> 02:33:13.510] And he was basically not holding together anymore. But he would still, like, take his, what do you call those rolling shares. And he would walk, like, 500 meters down to the house where the elderly people stayed. And he would go from window to window and talk to all of the old people who were, like, in isolation. And so he would always, like, try to find some way that he could be of use. And toward the very end, he couldn't speak.

[02:33:13.570 --> 02:33:41.510] He was, you know, almost completely lost. I don't think he recognized almost anyone. But he was still the same person. Because one of the nurses told us that there was another elderly woman in a wheelchair who had, who was sort of having a panic attack, I guess. That she was afraid of death and dementia. And so she was just acting out and throwing stuff.

[02:33:41.750 --> 02:34:06.830] And he saw that and, like, couldn't speak, couldn't do anything. But he just got up and, like, moved slowly over and, like, took her head. And then he just sat there, like, for two hours just holding her head. Because he could still sense that, like, she was getting calm by him holding her head. And so, like, to the very end, he was just doing, he was always looking for ways of, like, being obvious to other people.

[02:34:08.730 --> 02:34:38.730] And he never cared at all about him. And, like, he was never self-centered in any way whatsoever. And, like, when he died, he instructed that, like, he didn't want a grave. He wanted to be just put in the communal grave. And, like, without any plague. Because he just... I don't think he just felt like his work was done. Right? Now he'd, like...

[02:34:39.630 --> 02:35:05.950] He was here to be of service. And he also, like, I think made it the atheism punts from him. Like, he didn't believe in a life after this. He just believed it, like, being of service, being views. And then, like, disappearing into the night. So, he formed me in so many ways. And when I met Johan, we bought their house.

[02:35:07.950 --> 02:35:36.930] And they moved to, like, a Seer apartment next door, basically. And that was set up so they would have some time to say goodbye through life in a gradual way. So, during those years when we lived there, we hung out. Well, in the beginning, every day, he would just, like, barge into the house all the time. And it could always fix things. And then gradually less and less.

[02:35:37.090 --> 02:36:04.230] But it was always... And you always had to do the good work. I remember we were going to a party. I had a suit on. And he came. And it's like, it's the day for the potatoes. You know? It's like, yeah, but we can do that tomorrow. Maybe because I'm going... And he was 87 or something. And he was like, no, it's the day of the potatoes. And so, he just goes out and starts, like, I can't let the 87 year old plant all the potatoes.

[02:36:04.390 --> 02:36:29.730] So, like, standing there with the suit on or plant the potatoes. It's just... Yeah, he wanted to do the right thing all the time. So, that was very important to... It was a special experience. We spent three years where he was, like, the closest friend I had. Like, I spent more time with him than anyone else. And that was between 25 and 28. Like, a very formative period in my life.

[02:36:29.730 --> 02:36:58.260] And I do think that also sort of helped me, like, shape together some sort of about you system. There's a line from... I think it's from Herbert. I could be mistaken. So, forgive me. Repeat words stubbornly. Repeat old incantations of humanity, fables, and legends. Because this is how you will attain the good you will not attain. Repeat great words.

[02:36:58.700 --> 02:37:19.100] Repeat them stubbornly. Is there anything that you find yourself repeating? I have some poems that I often return to. Several of, like, Thomas Banner. Yeah, there's certain... Usually they're not, like...

[02:37:20.340 --> 02:37:49.300] There's a few lines that I like to repeat where, like, a sentence where it, like, encapsulates, like, a simple time and an important thought. But many of the ones I've turned to are more like a mood, almost. Oh, there's a... One that I often return to, and I think I have never eyes in Swedish, which was called the... I don't know, in English it's maybe, like, a short pause in the organ concert by John Sternler. Which is...

[02:37:50.420 --> 02:38:10.360] It's a beautiful kind of rendition of him going into a church and experiencing a certain connection to the human condition that comes out very strongly in that scene where he's standing in the church.

[02:38:10.360 --> 02:38:35.000] And I think there's, like, there's seven lines in there where he's talking about, like, how the book inside of the person gets rewritten every second. It's, like, a big, majestic book, but it's with so many pages that's still with air between them. And there's, like, waves going through it all the time, and the image is changing. I'm butchering the images.

[02:38:35.000 --> 02:39:03.120] But there's something about that poem, which you should link, that puts me back into, like, a sense of awe and care for the human being and for, like, the condition we're in and, like, how fragile we are and how small we are and how meaningful still. I got one last thing. It's not a question.

[02:39:03.260 --> 02:39:28.460] It's just something I wanted to read if you have a reaction and you do. But it was one of my favorite things he wrote recently. He was writing about a sculptor on the island. If you look at the cliffs that have been carved by the glaciers during the Ice Age, he wrote, you can still see the carvings there 10,000 years later, so these shapes will live on for a long time. And this is you. The feeling of a hand in 1972 made into an object that will stand for millennia.

[02:39:28.460 --> 02:39:55.980] It is hard not to see a parallel to some of the oldest preserved cave paintings, which are hands that have been held up against the cave wall and preserved as silhouettes by color pigments blown at the hand. We were here. We felt this. Yeah. I think that is a lot of what it comes down to because we're doing so much work to be done.

[02:39:55.980 --> 02:40:22.400] There's so, you know, hospitals to be manned and companies to be started and roads to be cleared. And there's so much work to be done. But sort of what, to me, it all amounts to what the point of it all is, like, these human experiences that that enables. And when you see those, like, I think it's from Argentina, you know, the hunter-gatherers have, like, blown colored pigments on their hands, leaving those on the wall.

[02:40:22.520 --> 02:40:51.840] It's just kind of, you know, it's a reminder to that feeling. It's like, yes, we have to, you know, gather roots. We have to kill lions. We have to eat. We have to mate. But, like, it all sort of calms down eventually. It's like, we're here. This is happening. Remember. Thank you, Henrik. Thank you, Axel. Thanks again for listening to my conversation with Henrik.

[02:40:52.000 --> 02:41:14.720] And before I leave you, I would like to thank Notion one more time. Notion is how it's all possible here at Dialectic, especially in the small ways that I use Notion to build out this world, to make sure I have a sense of all of the various aspects of this person that are bouncing off as I read or consume or listen to their various work before the conversation. How I make sense of that in my prep.

[02:41:14.720 --> 02:41:39.220] And then more importantly afterwards, the patterns, the lessons, the ideas that I can synthesize thanks to Notion AI, the things I might be missing, as well as just an integrated place where all of that lives, not just individual episodes, but the entire body of work at Dialectic. My site, Dialectic.fm, is hosted on Notion, and you can check out more there, whether it be the transcripts, the links, individual lessons I pulled out across the episodes, and more.

[02:41:39.220 --> 02:42:03.000] And as a reminder, Notion recently launched Notion Agents, so you can build a whole suite of little guys in your Notion database, whether it be solo or your entire team, that you can work with for big and small tasks. So little trivial things like reminders or spinning up documents or whatever that might be, or you might even imagine creating a full-on research assistant to help you work through the problem you are working on. Thanks again to Notion, and I will see you next time.