[00:00:00] Dwarkesh Patel: Okay, today I'm chatting with Terence Tao, who needs an introduction. Terence, I want to begin by having you retell the story of how Kepler discovered the laws of planetary motion, because I think this will be a great jumping off point to talk about AI for math.

[00:00:15] Terence Tao: Terence Tao Okay, yeah. So I've always had an amateur interest in astronomy, and so I've loved stories of how the early astronomers worked out the nature of the universe.

[00:00:23] Terence Tao: Terence Tao So Kepler was building on the work of Copernicus, who was himself building on the work of Aristarchus. So Copernicus very famously proposed the heliocentric model that instead of the planets and sun going around the earth, that the sun was at the center of the solar system and the other planets were going around the sun. And Copernicus proposed that the orbits of the planets were perfect circles.

[00:00:46] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And his theory kind of fit the observations that the Greeks and the Arabs and Indians had worked out over centuries. Terence Tao I think Kepler got interested, like he learned about these theories in his studies, and he made this observation that the ratios of the size of the orbits that Copernicus predicted seem to have some geometric meaning.

[00:01:09] Terence Tao: Terence Tao I think he started proposing that, you know, if you take, say, the orbit of, say, the Earth, and you enclose it in, I think, maybe a cube, the outer sphere that encloses the cube almost match perfectly the orbit of Mars and so forth. Terence Tao And there were six planets, none at the time, five gaps between them, and there were five perfect platonic solids. Terence Tao The cube, the tetrahedron, isochedron, octahedron, and dodecaedron.

[00:01:34] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And so he had this theory, which he thought was absolutely beautiful, that he could inscribe these platonic solids between the spheres of the planets, and it seemed to fit. Terence Tao And it seemed to be to him like, you know, God's design of the planets was matching this mathematical perfection of the platonic solids. Terence Tao So he needed data to confirm this theory. Terence Tao And at the time, there was only one really high-quality data set almost in existence, okay, which was the, so Tycho Brahe,

[00:02:04] Terence Tao: Terence Tao This Danish astronomer, very wealthy, eccentric astronomer, had managed to convince the Danish government to fund this extremely expensive observatory. Terence Tao And so he had taken decades of observations of all the planets, Mars, Jupiter, every night, at least every night for which the weather was clear, with the naked eye, actually. Terence Tao He was the last of the naked eye astronomers. Terence Tao And so he had all this data which Kepler could use to confirm his theory. Terence Tao And so Kepler started working with Tycho, but Tycho was very jealous of the data.

[00:02:34] Terence Tao: Terence Tao He only gave little bits of it at a time. Terence Tao And I think Kepler eventually just stole the data. Terence Tao He copied it and had to have a fight with Brahe's descendants. Terence Tao But he did work out, he did get the data, and then he worked out to kind of his disappointment that his beautiful theory didn't quite work. Terence Tao And so Kepler The data was sort of off from his platonic solid theory by about 10% or something. Terence Tao And he had all kinds of fudges moving the circles around and things. Terence Tao It didn't quite work.

[00:03:02] Terence Tao: Terence Tao But he worked on this problem for years and years. Terence Tao And eventually he figured out how to use the data to work out the actual orbits of the planets. Terence Tao And that was an incredibly clever, genius amount of data analysis. Terence Tao And then he eventually worked out that the ellipses, not circles, which was shocking for him. Terence Tao And then he worked out the two laws of planetary motion, ellipses, also equal areas, sweep out equal times.

[00:03:33] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And then 10 years later, after collecting a lot of data, the furthest planets like Saturn and Jupiter were the hardest for him to work out. Terence Tao And then he finally worked out this third law also, that the orbits, the time it takes for a planet to complete its orbit was proportional to some power of the distance to the sun. Terence Tao And these are the three famous Kepler's laws of motion. Terence Tao And he had no explanation for them. Terence Tao It was just all driven by experiment.

[00:04:03] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And it took Newton a century later to give a theory that explained all three laws at once.

[00:04:09] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao The take I want to try on you is that Kepler was a high temperature LLM. Terence Tao Where Newton comes up with this explanation of why the three laws of planetary motion must be true. Terence Tao And of course, the way that Kepler discovers the laws of planetary motion or figures out the relative orbits of the different planets is, as you say, a work of genius. Terence Tao But then, you know, through his career, he's just trying random relationships.

[00:04:33] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao And in fact, in the book in which he writes down the third law of planetary motion, it's sort of an aside on the harmonics of the world, which is this book about, you know, all these different planets have these different harmonies. Terence Tao And the reason there's so much famine and misery on Earth is because the Earth is Mi Fa Mi. Terence Tao That's the node of Earth. Terence Tao And so all this random astrology.

[00:04:51] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao But in there is the cube square law, which tells you what relationship the period has to a planet's distance from the sun, which is, as you're detailing, if you add that to Newton's F equals ma, and then the equation for centripetal acceleration, you get the inverse square law. Terence Tao And so Newton works that out.

[00:05:12] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao But the reason I think this is an interesting story is I feel like LLMs can do the kind of thing of like 20 years, let's try random relationships, some of which make no sense. Terence Tao As long as there's a verifiable data bank, like Brahe's data set, where, okay, I'm going to try out random things about like musical notes. Terence Tao I'm going to try out random things about platonic objects. Terence Tao I'm going to all these different geometries have this bias that there's some important thing about the geometry of these orbits. Terence Tao And then one thing works.

[00:05:36] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao And as long as you can verify it, these empirical regularities can then drive actual deep scientific progress.

[00:05:44] Terence Tao: Terence Tao Traditionally, when we talk about the history of science, idea generation has always been kind of the prestige part of science. Terence Tao So I mean, a scientific problem comes with, there's many steps, you know, you have to identify a problem, and then you have to identify a good problem to work on, a fruitful problem. Terence Tao And then you need to collect data, you need to figure out a strategy to analyze the data, to make a hypothesis. Terence Tao And then you need to validate and then you need to write things up and explain that there's a dozen different components.

[00:06:14] Terence Tao: Terence Tao But yeah, the ones we celebrate are these sort of Eureka genius moments of idea generation. Terence Tao And yeah, so Kepler certainly had to, as you say, cycle through many ideas and several which didn't work. Terence Tao And I bet many that he didn't even publish at all, because they just didn't fit. Terence Tao And that's an important part of the process, trying all kinds of random things and seeing if they worked.

[00:06:41] Terence Tao: Terence Tao But as you say, you know, they have to be matched by an equal amount of verification. Terence Tao And then you know, I mean, we celebrate Kepler, but we should also celebrate Brahe for his assiduous data collection, which was ten times more precise than any previous observation. Terence Tao And that extra decimal point of accuracy was actually essential for Kepler to get his results.

[00:07:08] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And, you know, and he was using, you know, Euclidean geometry and like, like the most advanced mathematics he could use at the time to match his models with the data. Terence Tao So like all aspects had to be in play, you know, the data and the theory and the hypothesis generation. Terence Tao I'm not sure nowadays that hypothesis generation is the bottleneck anymore. Terence Tao Science Science has changed in the century since.

[00:07:37] Terence Tao: Terence Tao So classically sort of the two big paradigms for science were theory and experiment. Terence Tao Then in the 20th century, numerical simulation came along. Terence Tao So you can also do computer simulations to test theories. Terence Tao But then finally, in the late 20th century, we had big data. Terence Tao We had the era of data analysis.

[00:07:58] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And so a lot of new progress is actually driven now by analyzing massive data sets first, collecting large data sets, and then drawing the patterns from them to deduce laws, which is a little bit different from how science used to work, where you make a few observations or you just have one out of the blue idea. Terence Tao And then you collect data to test your idea. Terence Tao That's the classic scientific method. Terence Tao Now it's almost reverse. Terence Tao You collect big data first, and then you try to get hypotheses from it.

[00:08:25] Terence Tao: Terence Tao I mean, Kepler was maybe one of the first early data scientists, but even he didn't start with Tycho's data set and analyze it. Terence Tao He had some preconceived theories first. Terence Tao But it seems like this is less and less the way we make progress just because the data is just so much more massive. Terence Tao It's just so much more useful.

[00:08:48] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao Oh, interesting. Terence Tao I actually feel like the mold of 20th century science that you're describing is actually very well describes what happened in Kepler, where he did have these ideas. Terence Tao And then he's like, you know, I think it's a big thing. Terence Tao But they were wrong. Terence Tao And then a few years later, he gets Brahi's data. Terence Tao And it's only after 20 years of just trying random things that he gets this empirical regularity.

[00:09:15] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao And so it actually feels closer to Brahi's data is analogous to some massive data bank of simulations. Terence Tao And then now that you've got the data, you can keep trying random things. Terence Tao But if it wasn't, Kepler would be out there just writing books about harmonics and platonic objects and there would be nothing to actually verify against.

[00:09:35] Terence Tao: Terence Tao Yeah, yeah, yeah. Terence Tao So the data was extremely important. Terence Tao But the distinction I was trying to make was that sort of traditionally you make a hypothesis and then you test it against data.

[00:09:45] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao Yeah.

[00:09:46] Terence Tao: Terence Tao But now with machine learning and data analysis and statistics and so on, Terence Tao You can start with data and through say statistics work out laws that were not present before. Terence Tao So Kepler's third law is a little bit like this, except that for the third law, instead of having the thousand data points that Brahi had, Kepler had like six data points. Terence Tao Like every planet, you knew the length of the orbit and the distance of the sun and there was like five or six data points.

[00:10:15] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And he did what we would now call regression. Terence Tao You know, he could fit a curve to the six data points and he got a square group law, which was amazing. Terence Tao But actually, he was quite lucky. Terence Tao I mean that these six data points gave him the right conclusion. Terence Tao That's not enough data to be really reliable. Terence Tao There was a later astronomer, Johannes Bordet, who took the same data, actually, the distances to the planets.

[00:10:41] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And inspired by Kepler, I think he had a prediction that the distances to the planets formed basically a shift to geometric progression. Terence Tao That he also fit a curve. Terence Tao Except that there was one point missing. Terence Tao So there was a big gap between Mars and Jupiter. Terence Tao His law predicted that there was a missing planet. Terence Tao So it was a kind of a crank theory, except when Uranus was discovered by Herschel, the distance Uranus fit exactly this pattern.

[00:11:05] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And then Ceres was discovered, this asteroid between, I think in the asteroid belt, and it also fit the pattern. Terence Tao So people got really excited that the board had discovered this amazing new law of nature. Terence Tao But then Neptune was discovered and it was completely like way off. Terence Tao And basically, it was just a numerical fluke. Terence Tao Interesting Terence Tao There were six data points. Terence Tao So maybe one reason why Kepler didn't highlight his third law as much as the first two laws.

[00:11:35] Terence Tao: Terence Tao Maybe instinctively, even though he didn't have modern statistics, he kind of knew that with six data points, he had to be somewhat tentative with the conclusions.

[00:11:44] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao But maybe to ask the question about the analogy more explicitly. Terence Tao Does this analogy make sense to if we have, you know, in the future, we'll have smarter and smarter AIs, and we'll have millions of them. Terence Tao And then they can go out and hunt for all these empirical regularities. Terence Tao It sounds like you don't think the bottleneck in science is finding more things that are for each given field, their equivalent of the third law of planetary motion. Terence Tao So that then later on, somebody can say, oh, we need a way to explain this. Terence Tao Let's work out the math.

[00:12:14] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao Here's the inverse square law of gravity.

[00:12:17] Terence Tao: Terence Tao Right. Terence Tao So I think AI has basically driven the cost of idea generation down to almost zero. Terence Tao In a very similar way to how the internet drove the cost of communication down to almost zero. Terence Tao Yeah. Terence Tao Which is an amazing thing, but it doesn't make, it doesn't create abundance by itself. Terence Tao Yeah. Terence Tao So now the bottleneck is different. Terence Tao So we're now in a situation where suddenly people can generate thousands of theories for a given scientific problem. Terence Tao And now we have to verify them, evaluate them.

[00:12:45] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And this is something which we have to change our structures of science to actually sort this out. Terence Tao So, you know, in fact, traditionally, we build walls. Terence Tao So in the past, before we had AI slop, you know, we had sort of amateur scientists, you know, create, you know, have their own theories of the universe, many of which were basically of very little value. Terence Tao Yeah.

[00:13:07] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And so we put these like, you know, peer review publication systems and things to kind of filter out and try to isolate the high signal ideas to test. Terence Tao But now that we can generate these possible explanations at massive scale, and some of them are good and a lot are terrible. Terence Tao I mean, human reviewers, we just, it's just, they're already being overwhelmed, actually. Terence Tao Many, many, many journals are reporting AI general submissions are just flooding their submissions.

[00:13:38] Terence Tao: Terence Tao So it's great that we can generate all kinds of things now with AI, but it means that we have to, the rest of the aspects of science have to catch up. Terence Tao Yeah, so verification, validation, and assessing what ideas actually move the subject forward, and which ones are dead ends or red herrings. Terence Tao And that's, that's not something where we've, we know how to do at scale.

[00:14:02] Terence Tao: Terence Tao You know, for each individual paper, we can discuss it with, you know, have a debate among scientists and get to a consensus in a few years. Terence Tao But when we're generating, you know, 1000 of these every day, yeah, this doesn't work.

[00:14:13] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao So I think there is this incredibly interesting question of you have billions of AI scientists. Terence Tao Not only how do you gauge which ones are real progress, but how do you, I mean, this is actually a question that human science has had to face. Terence Tao And we've solved somehow.

[00:14:42] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao And then, but there's like all these papers about the engineering constraints there and the details. Terence Tao And then there's one which is like, comes up with the idea of the bit, which has implications across many different fields. Terence Tao And you need some system which can then look at that and say, okay, we need to apply this to probability. Terence Tao We need to apply this to computer science, etc. Terence Tao And in the future, the AIs are coming up with, you know, the next version of this kind of unifying concept.

[00:15:06] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao And how would you identify it among millions of papers, which might actually constitute progress, but which have much less general unifying ideas?

[00:15:14] Terence Tao: Terence Tao So a lot of it's the test of time. Terence Tao So many great ideas didn't actually get a great reception at the time that they were first proposed. Terence Tao It was only after some other scientists realized that they could take it further and apply them to their own. Terence Tao Deep learning itself was actually a niche area of AI for a long time. Terence Tao The idea of getting answers entirely through training on data and not through first principles, you know, reasoning was very controversial. Terence Tao And then they took a long time before it actually started bearing fruit.

[00:15:43] Terence Tao: Terence Tao You know, you mentioned. Terence Tao I mentioned a bit, you know, I mean, there are other proposals for computer architectures than the 01 that is universal today. Terence Tao I think there were tricks, you know, 01, you know, three valued logic and, you know, in an alternate universe, maybe a different paradigm would have showed up. Terence Tao People have argued that, you know, the transformer, for example, is the foundation of all modern large language models. Terence Tao And it was the first deep learning architecture that really was sophisticated enough to capture language. Terence Tao But it didn't have to be that way.

[00:16:12] Terence Tao: Terence Tao There could have been some other architecture that was the first to do it. Terence Tao And once that was adopted, it would become the standard. Terence Tao So I think one reason why it's hard to assess whether a given idea is going to be fruitful is that it depends on the future. Terence Tao It depends on and it depends on also on the culture and society, like which ones get adopted, which ones don't.

[00:16:37] Terence Tao: Terence Tao The base 10 numeral system in mathematics is extremely useful, much better than the Roman numeral system, for instance. Terence Tao But again, there's nothing special about 10. Terence Tao It's a system that we it's useful for us because everyone else uses it. Terence Tao And we've standardized it and we've brought all our computers and our number of representation systems around it. Terence Tao And so we're stuck with it now, actually. Terence Tao Some people occasionally push for other systems than decimal, but there's too much inertia.

[00:17:09] Terence Tao: Terence Tao So you can't look at any given scientific achievement purely in isolation and give it an objective grade without being aware of the context, both in the past and the future. Terence Tao And so it may never be something that you can just reinforce and learn the same way that you can for much sort of more localized problems.

[00:17:31] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao Yeah. Terence Tao It seems often in the history of science, when a new theory comes up, Terence Tao That in retrospect, we realize is correct. Terence Tao It seems to make implications that just either make no sense because they're wrong. Terence Tao And we realize later on why they're wrong, or they're correct, but seem wildly impossible at the time.

[00:17:49] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao So as you've talked about, Aristarchus had heliocentrism in the third century BC, and then the ancient Athenians were like, this can't be because it would if the earth is going around the sun, we should see the relative position of the stars change as we're going around the sun. Terence Tao And the only way that wouldn't be the case is if they're so far away that you don't notice any parallax, which is actually the correct implication. Terence Tao But there's times when actually the implication isn't correct, and we just need to graduate to a better level of understanding.

[00:18:18] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao So Leibniz would, you know, chide Newton and disagree with Newton's theory of gravity on the basis that it implied action at a distance. Terence Tao And then there's, we don't know the mechanism. Terence Tao And then there's, we don't know the mechanism, and Newton himself was sort of stunned that inertial mass and gravitational mass were the same quantity. Terence Tao So all these things, which are resolved by Einstein. Terence Tao Yes, yes. Terence Tao But it was still progress. Terence Tao And so the question for a system of peer-review for AI would be, even if you can falsify a theory, how would you notice that it still constitutes progress relative to the thing before?

[00:18:48] Terence Tao: Terence Tao Yeah, so often actually the ultimately correct theory initially is worse in many ways. Terence Tao Yeah, so Copernicus's theory of the planets, it was less accurate than Tomli's theory. Terence Tao So geocentrism had been developed for a millennium by that point, and they had made many, many tweaks and very increasingly complicated ad hoc fixes to make it more and more accurate. Terence Tao And Copernicus's theory was a lot simpler, but much less accurate.

[00:19:16] Terence Tao: Terence Tao It was only Kepler that made it more accurate than Tomli's theory. Terence Tao I mean, science is always a work in progress. Terence Tao So when you only get part of the solution, it looks worse than a theory which is incorrect, but somehow it has been completed to the point where it kind of answers all the questions.

[00:19:37] Terence Tao: Terence Tao As you say, Newton's theory had big mysteries, the equalness of mass and action at distance, which were only resolved with a very conceptually different approach centuries afterwards. Terence Tao Often progress has been made not by adding more theories, but by deleting some assumptions that you have in your mind.

[00:20:02] Terence Tao: Terence Tao So one reason why geocentrism held on for so long is we had this idea that objects naturally want to stay at rest. Terence Tao This is the Aristotelian notion of physics. Terence Tao And so the idea that the Earth was moving, how come we weren't all falling over? Terence Tao Once you have Newton's laws of motion, object in motion remains in motion and so forth, then it makes sense. Terence Tao But you had to, so conceptually, it's a very big conceptual leap to realize that the Earth is in motion. Terence Tao It doesn't feel like it's in motion.

[00:20:32] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And like the biggest advances, you know, Darwin's theory of evolution, you know, is the idea that species are not static. Terence Tao But you know, it's not obvious because you don't see evolution in your lifetime. Terence Tao Well, now we actually can, but you know, it seems permanent and static.

[00:20:57] Terence Tao: Terence Tao Right now we're going through a cognitive version of the Copernican revolution, where we used to think that human intelligence is the center of the universe. Terence Tao And now we're actually seeing that there's very different types of intelligence that are out there with very different strengths and weaknesses. Terence Tao And so our assessment of which tasks require intelligence, which ones don't, has to be reordered quite a bit.

[00:21:21] Terence Tao: Terence Tao And so, you know, trying to fit AI into sort of our theories of scientific progress and what is hard and what is easy. Terence Tao We're struggling quite a lot. Terence Tao We have to ask questions that we've never really had to ask before. Terence Tao Maybe the philosophers had, but now we all have to deal with it.

[00:21:35] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao This actually brings up a topic I've been very curious about. Terence Tao So you mentioned Darwin's theory of evolution. Terence Tao There's this book, The Clockwork Universe by Edward Dahlneck, which covers a lot of this era of history we're talking about. Terence Tao And he has this interesting observation in there that The Origin of Species is published in 1859. Terence Tao The Principia Mathematica is published in 1687. Terence Tao So the Origin of Species comes out basically two centuries after The Principia. Terence Tao And conceptually, it seems like Darwin's theory is simpler.

[00:22:02] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao There's a contemporaneous biologist to Darwin who reads The Origin of Species, Thomas Huxley, and he says, Terence Tao How stupid not to have thought of that. Terence Tao And nobody ever says that about Principia. Terence Tao They're chiding themselves for not having beaten Newton to gravity. Terence Tao And so there's a question of, well, why did it take longer? Terence Tao It seems like a big part of the reason is that the evidence for natural selection is cumulative and retrospective, Terence Tao Whereas Newton can just like, here's my equations, let me see the moon's orbital period and its distance.

[00:22:31] Dwarkesh Patel: Terence Tao And if it lines up, then we've made progress. Terence Tao And so Lucretius actually had the idea, this idea that species adapted their environment in the first century BC. Terence Tao But nobody ever like really talks about it until Darwin, because Lucretius can't run some experiment and people are forced to pay attention. Terence Tao And so I wonder if we'll in retrospect end up seeing much more progress in domains which are have this kind of tight data loop where you can verify them quite easily, even though they're conceptually much more difficult.

[00:23:01] Terence Tao: Terence Tao I think one aspect of science is it's not just creating a new theory and validating it, but communicating it to others. Terence Tao So Darwin was actually an amazing science communicator. Terence Tao He wrote in English, in natural language, I'm speaking like that. Terence Tao No lean. Terence Tao I have to sort of get out of my technical mindset.

[00:23:25] Terence Tao: Terence Tao He spoke in plain English, didn't use equations, and he synthesized a lot of disparate facts. Terence Tao So little pieces of evolution had been worked out in the past, but he had this very compelling vision. Terence Tao And again, still missing things like he didn't know the mechanism for hereditary. Terence Tao He didn't have DNA. Terence Tao Yeah, but his writing style was persuasive, and that helped a lot.

[00:23:54] Terence Tao: Terence Tao Newton wrote in Latin. Terence Tao He invented, you know, entire new areas of mathematics just to explain what he was doing. Terence Tao He was also from an era which was where scientists were much more secretive and competitive. Terence Tao So academia is still competitive, but it was even worse back in Newton's day. Terence Tao So he held back some of his best insights because he didn't want his rivals to get any advantage. Terence Tao He was also actually a somewhat unpleasant person from what I gather, actually.

[00:24:21] Terence Tao: Terence Tao So it was actually only a couple decades after Newton where other scientists explained his work in much simpler terms that they became widespread. Terence Tao So, yeah, the art of exposition and making a case and creating a narrative is also a very important part of science. Terence Tao And if you have the data, it helps, but people need to be convinced.

[00:24:51] Terence Tao: Terence Tao He was a very smart person, but they're not able to be convinced.

[00:25:18] Terence Tao: even though we pride ourselves on having an objective side to it where there's data and there's experiment and validation, we still have to tell stories and convince our fellow scientists. And that's a soft, squishy thing. Like it's, you know, it's a combination of data and painting a narrative. And it's a narrative of gaps, you know. I mean, so even Darwin, as I said, there are pieces of his theory he cannot explain.

[00:25:47] Terence Tao: But he could still make a case that, you know, in the future people would find transitional forms, that they would find the mechanism of inheritance. And they did. Yeah. I don't know how you can quantify that in such a precise way that you can start to reinforce something. Maybe that will be forever the human side of science.

[00:26:11] Dwarkesh Patel: One takeaway I had from reading and watching your stuff on the Cosmic Distance Letter. By the way, I highly, highly, highly recommend people watch your series with Through the One Round on the Cosmic Distance Ladder. But one takeaway was that the deductive overhang in many fields could be so much bigger than people realize, where if you just had the right insight about how to study a problem, you might be surprised at how much more you could learn about the world. And I wonder if you think that's sort of a product of astronomy

[00:26:41] Dwarkesh Patel: at the particular times in history that you're studying? Or is this that based on the data that is incident on the Earth right now, we could actually divine a lot more than we happen to know?

[00:26:51] Terence Tao: Right. So astronomy was one of the first sciences to really embrace data analysis and squeezing every last possible drop of information out of the information they had because data was the bottleneck. I mean, it still is the bottleneck. I mean, it's really hard to collect astronomical data. So astronomers are the best, you know, almost, world class in extracting, you know, almost like Sherlock, you know, it's just like extracting all kinds of conclusions from little traces of data.

[00:27:22] Terence Tao: I hear that a lot of quant hedge funds, they're preferred hires in astronomy PhD. They also are very interested for other reasons in extracting signals from various random bits of data.

[00:27:35] Dwarkesh Patel: Okay. Speaking of clever ideas, one of my listeners, Sean, solved the puzzle that Jane Street made for my audience and posted a great walkthrough on X. For context, Jane Street trained AriseNet and then shuffled all 96 layers and then challenged people to put them back in the right order using only the model's outputs and training data. You can't brute force this. There's more possible orderings than atoms in the universe. So Sean broke the problem into two different parts. First, pair the layers into 48 different blocks

[00:28:03] Dwarkesh Patel: and second, put those blocks in the right order. For pairing, Sean realized that in a well-trained resonant, the product of two weight matrices in a residual block should have a distinctive negative diagonal pattern. And this arises as a way for the model to keep the residual stream from growing out of control. From this insight, he was able to recover the right pairings. For ordering, Sean noticed that the model seemed to improve if he sorted the blocks by the size of the residual contributions. Starting with that rough approximation,

[00:28:31] Dwarkesh Patel: he combined a clever ranking heuristic with local swaps to recover the exact right order. His full walkthrough is linked in the description. Don't worry if you didn't get to this puzzle in time though. There's still one up about backdoor LLMs that even Jane Street doesn't know how to solve. You can find it at janestreet.com slash dworkash. All right, back to Terence.

[00:28:50] Terence Tao: We do underexplore sort of how to extract extra information from various signals. Like, just to pick one random study, I remember reading once that people had discovered or trying to measure how often scientists actually read these citations, the papers that they cite. So how do you measure this? You could try to survey different scientists, but they had some clever tricks.

[00:29:20] Terence Tao: So many citations have little typos, like a number is wrong or punctuation symbol is wrong. And they measured how often a typo got copied from one reference to the next, and they could infer whether an author was actually just copying it, cutting and pasting a reference without actually checking it. And so from that, they were able to infer some measure of sort of how much attention people were paying. So there are also clever tricks to extract.

[00:29:50] Terence Tao: So these questions you posed earlier, how can we assess whether a scientific development is fruitful or interesting or represents real progress? Maybe there are really useful metrics or footprints of this phenomenon in a data survey. We can examine citations and how often something is mentioned in a conference or something.

[00:30:17] Terence Tao: And maybe there's a lot of sociology of science research to be done and that could actually detect these things. Yeah, maybe we usually get some astronomers on the case actually.

[00:30:31] Dwarkesh Patel: Okay, so I think this brings us nicely to the progress that from the outside, it seems like AI for math is making. And I think you had a post recently where you pointed out that over the last few months, AI programs have solved 50 out of the 1,100 odd or those problems. But then I think, I don't know if it's still correct, but as of a month ago, you said that there had been a pause because a little hanging fruit had been picked. First of all, I'm curious if actually that is still the case that we have picked a little hanging fruit

[00:30:59] Dwarkesh Patel: and now we're at this plateau currently.

[00:31:02] Terence Tao: It does seem so. I mean, there's still activity at the other... Yeah, so 50 odd problems have been solved with AI systems, which is great, but there's like 600 to go. And people are still chipping away at one or two of these right now. We're seeing a lot fewer sort of pure AI solutions now where the AI just one-shots the problem. So there was a month where that happened and that has stopped. Not for lack of trying. I know three separate attempts

[00:31:30] Terence Tao: to get frontier model AIs to just attack every single one of the problems simultaneously. And they picked up some minor observations or maybe they found that some problems are already solved in the literature, but there hasn't been any further AI purely powered solution yet. People are using AI a lot currently. So someone might use AI to generate a possible proof strategy and then another person will use a separate AI tool to critique it or rewrite it

[00:31:59] Terence Tao: or generate some numerical data for it or do a literature survey. And some problems have been solved by an ongoing conversation between lots of humans and lots of AI tools. But it does seem like it was this one-off thing. So maybe one analogy for these problems is like imagine like there's all these that you're in some sort of mountain range with all kinds of cliffs and walls

[00:32:26] Terence Tao: and maybe there's a little wall which is maybe like three feet high and one that's six feet high and then there's 15 feet high and then there's some mile high cliffs. And you're trying to climb as many of these cliffs as possible. But it's in the dark. We don't know which ones are tall, which ones are short. And so, you know, we try to light some candles and make some maps and slowly we kind of figure out some of them are climbable. Some of them we can identify

[00:32:54] Terence Tao: some partial track in the wall that you can reach first. And then these AI tools, they're kind of like these jumping machines that can kind of jump, you know, two meters in the air, you know, higher than any human. And sometimes they jump in the wrong direction and sometimes they crash, but sometimes they can reach the tops of the lowest, you know, walls that we couldn't reach before. And so we basically set them loose in this mountain range hopping around and, you know, and then there's this exciting period

[00:33:23] Terence Tao: where they could actually find all the low ones and they could reach them. But then there's been no, you know, I mean, maybe if the next time there's a big advance in the models, then they will try it again and maybe a few more will be breached. But it's a different style of doing mathematics than sort of the, you know, so normally we would hill climb and, you know, we would make little markers

[00:33:52] Terence Tao: and try to identify partial things. And, you know, these tools, they either succeed or they fail. And they've been really bad at creating sort of partial progress or identifying intermediate stages that you should focus on first. Again, going back to this previous discussion, you know, we don't have a way of evaluating partial progress. The same way you can evaluate a one-shot success or failure of solving a problem.

[00:34:18] Dwarkesh Patel: So there's two different ways to think through what you've just said. And one of them is more bearish on AI progress and one of them is more bullish. And bearish one being, oh, they're only getting to a certain height of wall, which is not as high as humans are reaching. And the second is that, well, they have this powerful property that once they achieve a certain waterline, they can fill every single problem that is available at that waterline, which we simply can't do with humans where we can't make a million copies of you

[00:34:47] Dwarkesh Patel: and give each of them a million dollars of inference compute and have you do a hundred years of subjective time research on a hundred different problems at the same time or a million different problems at the same time. But once AIs reach Terence Tower level, they could do that. And once they reach intermediate levels, they could do the intermediate version of that. So the same reason that we should be bearish now is the reason we should be especially bullish, not even when they achieve superhuman intelligence, but just when they achieve human level intelligence because their human level

[00:35:16] Dwarkesh Patel: intelligence is qualitatively wider and more powerful than our human level intelligence.

[00:35:21] Terence Tao: I agree. Yeah. So they excel at breadth and humans excel at depth and human experts at least. Yeah. So I think they're very complementary, but our current way of doing math and science is focused on depth because that's where the human expertise is because humans can't do breadth. But yeah, so we have to redesign the way we do science to take full advantage of this breadth capability that we now have. So as I said,

[00:35:50] Terence Tao: we should have a lot more effort in creating very broad classes of problems to work on rather than one or two really deep, important problems. I mean, we should still have the deep, important problems and humans should still be working on them. But now we have this other way of doing science. You know, I mean, we can explore entire new fields of science by first getting these broad, moderately competent AI to sort of map it out and clear out all the easy, make all the easy observations

[00:36:20] Terence Tao: and then identify certain islands of difficulty which, you know, then human experts can come and work on. So I see very much a future of very complementary science. Eventually, you would hope to get both breadth and depth, you know, and somehow get the best of both worlds. but I think we need practice with the breadth side. It's too new. We don't even have the paradigms really to

[00:36:50] Terence Tao: make full advantage of it but we will and then science will be unrecognizable after that.

[00:36:55] Dwarkesh Patel: To this point about complementarity, programmers have noticed that they're way more productive as a result of these AI tools and I don't know if you as a mathematician feel the same way but it does seem like one big difference between vibe coding and vibe researching is that with software the whole point of the thing is to have some effect on the world through your work and if it leads to you better understanding a problem or you coming up with some clean abstraction

[00:37:25] Dwarkesh Patel: to embody in your code that is instrumental to the end goal whereas maybe with research the reason we care about solving the millennium problems is presumably that in the process of solving them we discover new mathematical objects or better new techniques and those who understand our civilization's understanding of mathematics and so the proof is sort of instrumental to the intermediate work. I don't know if you agree with that dichotomy or if that in any way

[00:37:55] Dwarkesh Patel: will explain the relative uplift we'll see in software versus research.

[00:37:58] Terence Tao: Right. So certainly in math the process is often more important than the problem itself. The problem is kind of a proxy for measuring the progress and I think even in software there's different types of software tasks I mean if you just kind of create a web page that does the same thing that a thousand other web pages do there's sort of no skill to be learned well there's still some skill maybe that the individual programmer could pick up but you know for kind of a boilerplate type code definitely

[00:38:28] Terence Tao: you know it's something that you should definitely offload to AI but you know sometimes once you make the code you know you still have to maintain it and there's issues with upgrading it and making it compatible with other things and that I think I've heard that programmers are reporting you know that even if an AI can create the first prototype of a tool making it mesh with everything else and making it interact with the real world in the way they want I mean that's an ongoing process

[00:38:57] Terence Tao: and if you didn't have the skills that you pick up from writing the code that may impact your ability to maintain it down the road so certainly mathematicians you know we've used problems to build intuition and to train people to have a good idea as what's true what to expect what is provable what is difficult and so just getting the answers

[00:39:27] Terence Tao: right away may actually inhibit that process I mean so I made a distinction between theory and experiment before so in most sciences there's an equal division between there's a theoretical side and experimental side but math has been almost unique it's almost entirely theoretical we we we pay the premium on sort of trying to to have coherent clean theories of why things are true and false and we haven't done

[00:39:57] Terence Tao: much experiments as to like you know maybe we have two different ways to solve a problem which one is more effective we have we have some intuition but we haven't done large scale studies where we take a thousand problems and we just test them but we can do that now so I think AI type tools we really will actually revolutionize the experimental side of math where you don't care so much about individual problems and the process of solving them but you want to gather

[00:40:26] Terence Tao: just large scale data about what things work what things don't same way that if you want to if you're a software company and you want to roll out a thousand pieces of software you don't really want to handcraft each one and learn lessons from each you just want to find what are the workflows that you scale so we don't yet the idea of doing mathematics at scale is at its infancy but that's where AI is really going to revolutionize the subject

[00:40:51] Dwarkesh Patel: interesting I feel like a big crux in these conversations about how much how good AI will be for science is I think you said this it's like oh they're using existing techniques and modifying them and it would be interesting to understand how much progress one can make simply from using existing techniques like how much if I looked at the top math journals how many of them are how many of the papers are coming up with whatever coming up with the new technique means doing that versus using existing techniques in

[00:41:22] Dwarkesh Patel: new problems and what the overhang is where if you just applied every known technique to every open problem would that just constitute a humongous uplift in our civilization's knowledge or would that not be that impressive and useful

[00:41:34] Terence Tao: it's this is a great question and we don't have the data to fully answer it yet certainly a lot of work that human mathematicians do when you take a new problem one of the first things we do is we look at all the standard techniques that have worked on similar problems in the past and we try them one by one and sometimes that works and that's still worth publishing sometimes because the question was important sometimes they almost work and you have to add one more wrinkle to it and that's also

[00:42:04] Terence Tao: interesting but then the papers that go into the top journals are usually ones where the existing methods can kind of solve 80% of the problem but then this is 20% which is resistant and a new technique has to be invented to fill in the gaps it's very very rare now that a problem gets solved with sort of no reliance on past literature where all the ideas come out of nowhere that was more common in the past but math is so mature

[00:42:34] Terence Tao: now that it's it's just so much of a handicap to not use the literature first so AI tools are really good at getting really good at the first part of that just trying all the standard techniques on a problem often now actually making fewer mistakes in implementing them than humans they still make mistakes but I've tested these tools you know on like little tasks that I can do

[00:43:04] Terence Tao: and sometimes they pick up errors that I make sometimes I pick up errors that they make it's about a tie right now but yeah I haven't yet seen them take the next step you know so when there are holes in the argument where none of the techniques are working then what do you do and then they can kind of suggest random things and often I find that trying to chase them down and make them work and finding they don't work it wastes more time than it saves

[00:43:34] Terence Tao: yeah so now so I think some fraction of problems that we currently think are hard will fall from this method I mean especially the ones that haven't received enough attention so like with the Erdős problems you know like almost all of the 50 problems that were solved by AIs were ones for which basically there was no literature I mean Erdős posed a problem once or twice I think maybe some people tried it casually and they couldn't do it but they never wrote up anything

[00:44:03] Terence Tao: but there was a solution and it was just you know maybe combining this one obscure technique that not many people know about with some other resulting literature and that's the kind of love the median level of what AIs can accomplish and that's really great it clears out 50 of these problems so I think you'll see some isolated successes but there's six but what we found so people have to have done large scale sweeps of these Erdős problems and like if you only focus on the success stories the ones that get broadcast on social media that looks amazing

[00:44:33] Terence Tao: you know like all these problems that haven't been solved before for decades now they're falling but whenever we do a systematic study any given problem an AI tool has a success rate of maybe 1 or 2% it's just that it's just that they can buy a scale and if you just pick the winners it looks great so I think there'll be a similar thing happening with you know there are hundreds of really prestigious difficult math problems out there a couple may make you know some AI may get lucky

[00:45:02] Terence Tao: and actually solve them and there was some backdoor to solve the problem that everyone else missed and that will get a lot of publicity but then people will try these fancy tools on their own favorite problem and they will again experience the 1 to 2% success rate so there'll be a lot of noise amongst the signal of sort of when they're working when they're not we have to do it's increasingly important to collect these really standardized data sets

[00:45:32] Terence Tao: you know there are efforts now to create a standard set of challenge problems for AI to solve and not just rely on the AI companies to only publish their wins and not disclose their negative results so that will maybe give more clarity as to where we're actually at

[00:45:48] Dwarkesh Patel: although I think it's worth emphasizing how much progress in AI constitutes already to have models that are capable of applying some technique that nobody had written down is applicable to this particular

[00:45:59] Terence Tao: problem the progress is simultaneously amazing and disappointing it is a very strange feeling to see these tools in action and you know but also acclimatized really quickly you know I remember when Google's web search came out 20 years ago and it just blew all the other searches out of the water like you're just getting relevant hits on the front page like perfectly almost exactly what you wanted and it was amazing and then after a few years you just took for granted that you could just Google anything

[00:46:29] Terence Tao: and yeah so a lot of yeah I mean 2026 level AI would be stunning in 2021 and a lot of it you know face recognition natural speech doing you know college level math problems we just take for granted now right yeah

[00:46:43] Dwarkesh Patel: okay so speaking of 2026 AI you made a prediction in 2023 that I think by 2026 what was it it would be like a colleague in mathematics or

[00:46:52] Terence Tao: yeah a trustworthy co-author if used correctly which is

[00:46:55] Dwarkesh Patel: looking pretty good in retrospect yeah I'm pretty pleased so you know let's see if we can continue the streak you personally are 2x more productive as a result of AI what year would you say that

[00:47:10] Terence Tao: yeah so productivity I think is not quite a one-dimensional quantity like I'm definitely noticing that the style in which I do mathematics is changing quite a bit and the type of things I do so for example my papers now have a lot more code a lot more pictures because it's so easy to generate these things now so some plot which have taken me hours to do now I can do in minutes but in the past I just wouldn't have put the plot in my paper in the first place I

[00:47:52] Terence Tao: do do them without AI assistance they would definitely take five times longer but I would not write my papers that way 5x so yeah but it's because these are auxiliary times things like doing a much deeper literature search supplying a lot more numerics they enrich the paper so the core of what I do solving

[00:48:22] Terence Tao: the most difficult part of a math problem that hasn't changed too much I still use pen and paper for that but there's lots of silly things I use an AI agent now to reformat sometimes all my parentheses are not quite the right size I usually manually change my hand and I can get an AI agent to do all that quite nicely now in the background so yeah they really sped up lots of secondary tasks they haven't yet sped up

[00:48:52] Terence Tao: the core thing that I do but it's allowed me to add more things to my papers yeah but by the same token if I were to write a paper I wrote in 2020 again and not add all these extra features but just have something of the same sort of level functionality yeah then it doesn't save that much to be honest yeah so it's made the papers sort of richer and broader but not necessarily deeper

[00:49:19] Dwarkesh Patel: you made this distinction between artificial cleverness and artificial intelligence and I would like to better understand those concepts what is an example of intelligence that is not just cleverness yeah

[00:49:36] Terence Tao: so intelligence is famously hard to define it's one of these things you can't know it when you see it but when I talk to someone and we were trying to collaboratively solve a math problem together there's this conversation where neither of us knows how to solve the problem initially but one of us has some idea and it looks promising and so then we have some sort of prototype strategy and then

[00:50:05] Terence Tao: we test it and then it doesn't work but then we modify it and there's some adaptivity and continual improvement of the idea over time and eventually we've mapped out what doesn't work what does work and we not not not quite what the AI can kind of mimic this a little bit

[00:50:36] Terence Tao: so to go back to this analogy of these jumping robots you know so they can jump and fail and jump and fail but what they can't do is they jump a little bit and they reach some handhold but then they stay there and pull other people up and then they jump from there there isn't this cumulative process which is sort of built up interactively it seems to be a lot more trial and error and just repetition

[00:51:05] Terence Tao: brute force which it scales and it can work amazingly well in certain contexts but yeah this idea building up cumulatively from partial progress is kind of what's still not quite there yet

[00:51:22] Dwarkesh Patel: interesting you're saying if Gemini 3 or cloud 4.5 whatever solves a problem it is not the case that its own understanding of math has progressed or even if it works on a problem without solving it it's not

[00:52:22] Dwarkesh Patel: so every important dimension of a model's output. These rubrics go beyond simple correctness. Did the model reach for the right tools? Did it check its own work and explore alternative paths? How clear was its response? These skills are useful across domains. Math, physics, finance, psychology, and more. And they're becoming increasingly important as models take on harder, open-ended problems, some of which have multiple solutions and some of which we don't even know the solutions to. LabelBox can get your rubrics tailored to your domain, helping you systematically measure

[00:52:52] Dwarkesh Patel: and shape how your models think. Learn more at labelbox.com slash Dwarakash. One big question I have is, how plausible is it that if we just keep training AIs that get better and better at solving problems in Lean, that they will continue to solve more and more impressive problems? And then we will, in retrospect, be surprised at how little insight we got from some Lean solution to proving the rebound hypothesis or something? Or do you think it is a necessary condition

[00:53:21] Dwarkesh Patel: of solving the rebound hypothesis, even by an AI that is totally doing it in Lean, that the constructions which are made, the definitions which are created, even in the Lean program, have to advance our understanding of mathematics? Or do you think it could just be assembly code goobledagook?

[00:53:38] Terence Tao: Oh, yeah, we don't know. I mean, some problems have been basically solved by pure brute force. A full-color theorem is a famous example. We have still not found a conceptually elegant proof of this theorem. It basically, and maybe we never will. I mean, some problems may only be solvable by just splitting into some enormous number of cases and doing a brute force, uninsightful computer analysis on each case. I mean, part of the reason

[00:54:06] Terence Tao: we prize problems like a rebound hypothesis is that we're pretty sure that something amazing has to, a new type of mathematics has to be created or a new connection between two previously unconnected areas of mathematics has to be discovered to make this work. We don't even know what the shape of the solution is, but it doesn't feel like a problem that will be solved just by exhaustively checking cases or something. I mean, it could be false, actually. We could actually,

[00:54:35] Terence Tao: there is an unlikely scenario that the hypothesis is false and that you can compute, oh, here's a zero off the line and a massive computer calculation verifies it. That would be very disappointing. I don't know. I do feel that, you know, fully autonomous one-shot approaches are not the right approach for these problems. I mean, I think you'll get a lot more mileage and interplay between humans collaborating with these tools.

[00:55:06] Terence Tao: And I can see one of these problems being solved by some smart humans assisted by some extremely powerful AI tools. But the exact dynamic may be very different from what we envision right now. I mean, it could be a collaboration of a type that just doesn't exist yet. Yeah, I mean, there may be a way to generate, you know, a million variants of the human's data function

[00:55:35] Terence Tao: and do some data analysis, AI-assisted data analysis. And we discover some pattern between connecting them, which we didn't know about before. And this lets you transform the problem into a different area of mathematics. I mean, there could be all kinds of scenarios. So suppose the AI figures it out

[00:55:53] Dwarkesh Patel: and latent in the lean is some brand new construction, which, you know, if you realize the significance, we would be able to apply it in all these different situations. How do you even recognize it, right? Like if you just, again, a very naive question, if you come up with the equivalent of like Descartes comes up with this idea, oh, you can have this coordinate system where you can unify algebra and geometry. But in lean code, it would just look like R to R and it wouldn't look that significant or something.

[00:56:21] Dwarkesh Patel: Or similarly, I'm sure there's other constructions which have this kind of property.

[00:56:25] Terence Tao: Well, the beauty of formalizing a proof in something like lean is that you can take any piece of it and study it atomically. So, you know, so when I read a paper with my humans with, which shows some difficult problem, you know, there's often some big sequence of lemmas and theorems and things. And so ideally the author will talk their way through, you know, what's important, what's not. But sometimes they don't reveal what steps were the important ones

[00:56:52] Terence Tao: and which ones are just kind of boilerplate standard steps. But you can study each lemma in isolation and some of them I can say, oh, this looks fairly standard. This resembles something I'm familiar with. I'm pretty sure there's nothing interesting going on here. But this lemma, oh, that's something I haven't seen before. And I could see why if you had this result, that would really help prove the main result. Like you could, you know, you can assess whether some things are really sort of key

[00:57:19] Terence Tao: to your argument or not. And lean really facilitates that. You know, you can, you know, the individual steps are really precisely. I think in the future there'll be, you know, there'll be entire professions of mathematicians who might take a giant lean generated proof and maybe do some ablation on it or something. I'll try to remove parts of it and try to find more elegant ways, you know, maybe some other AIs to sort of do some reinforcement learning. How can you make the proof more elegant?

[00:57:50] Terence Tao: And maybe other AIs will grade whether this proof looks better or not. One thing that will change quite a bit in the near future is that until recently, writing papers was the most time-consuming and expensive part of the job. And so you did it very rarely. You know, you only wrote up your results once everything was all the other parts of your argument were checked out and things. Because just rewriting it again, refactoring was just a total pain. But that's one thing that's become a lot easier now with modern AI tools.

[00:58:20] Terence Tao: So, you know, you don't have to have just one version of your paper. You know, you can, once you have one, you know, people can generate hundreds more. So, yeah, one giant messy lean proof may not be very meaningful or understandable on its own. But other people can refactor it and do all kinds of things with it. We have seen with the Erdős problem website, you know, that people will, an AI will generate a proof and then here's 3,000 lines of code that verify the proof.

[00:58:47] Terence Tao: But then people got other AIs to summarize the proof and people write their own proofs. There's actually post-processing, once you actually have one proof, we actually have a lot of tools now to deconstruct it and interpret it. It's a very nascent area of science or mathematics. But I'm not as worried about, you know, so some people are concerned, what if the real hypothesis is proven with a completely incomprehensible proof? I think once you have the artifact of a proof,

[00:59:16] Terence Tao: we can do a lot of analysis on it.

[00:59:21] Dwarkesh Patel: You posted recently that it would be helpful to have a formal or semi-formal language for mathematical strategies as opposed to just mathematical proofs, which is what Lean specializes in. I would love to learn more about what that would involve or look like.

[00:59:34] Terence Tao: We don't really know. I mean, we've been very lucky in mathematics that we have worked out the laws of logic and mathematics, but this is actually a fairly recent accomplishment. I mean, it was started by Euclid, you know, millennia ago, but only in like the early 20th century did we finally list, like here are the axioms of mathematics, well, the standard axioms of what we call ZFC and the axioms of first-order logic. And this is what a proof is. And this we've managed to automate and have formal language for.

[01:00:05] Terence Tao: But there could be some way to assess plausibility of certain, you know, so you have a conjecture that something is true. You test a few examples and it works out. Like how does this increase your confidence that the conjecture is true? We have a few sort of mathematical ways to model this, Bayesian probability, for example. But they're not, but you often have to, they often, you have to set certain base assumptions

[01:00:32] Terence Tao: and there's a lot of subjectivity still in these tasks. So it is, it's not clear, I mean, this is more of a wish than a plan to develop these languages. But just seeing how successful having a formal framework in place like Lean has made deductive proofs so much easier to automate and train AI on.

[01:01:01] Terence Tao: if there was some similar framework, so the bottleneck for using AI to create strategies and make conjectures is we have to rely on human experts to, and the test of time to validate whether something's plausible or not. If there was some semi-formal framework where this could be done semi-automatically in a way that isn't sort of easily hackable to, you know, so of course, yeah, it's really important

[01:01:31] Terence Tao: with these formal proof assistants that there are just no, there's no backdoors or exploits that you can do to somehow get your certified proof without actually proving it because reinforcement learning is just so, so good at finding these backdoors. but, yeah, if a strong framework that sort of mimics how scientists talk to each other in a semi-formal way, you know, using data and argument

[01:02:00] Terence Tao: but also, you know, constructing narratives and there's some subjective aspect of science that we don't know how to capture in a way that we can insert AI into them in any useful way. Interesting. So, yeah, this is a future problem. I mean, there are research efforts to, you know, to try to create automated conjectures and maybe there are ways to benchmark these and get some

[01:02:31] Terence Tao: way to simulate this, but this is, it's all very, very new science. Can you help me

[01:02:36] Dwarkesh Patel: get some intuition for, I have two step questions. One, it would be very helpful to have a tangible sense of, it would be helpful to have a specific example of what something like this would look like that, the way scientists communicate that we can't formalize yet. And two, it seems almost definitionally paradoxical to say building up some narrative or building up

[01:03:05] Dwarkesh Patel: some natural language explanation and then also having something which you could have formalized. And I'm sure there's some intuition behind where that overlap is and I'd love to understand that better.

[01:03:19] Terence Tao: All right, so an example of a conjecture. So Gauss was interested in the prime numbers and he computed, he created one of the first mathematical data sets. He just computed the first 100,000 prime numbers or so hoping to find patterns. And he did find a pattern but maybe not the pattern he was expecting. He found a statistical pattern in the primes that if you count how many primes there are up to 100, 1,000, 1,000, they get sparser and sparser

[01:03:48] Terence Tao: but the drop-off in the density was inversely proportional to the natural logarithm of the range of numbers. So he conjectured what we now call the prime number theorem. The number of primes up to x is like x divided by the natural log of x. And he had no way to prove this. It was data driven. So this was a conjecture. It was revolutionary for its time because it was maybe the first

[01:04:18] Terence Tao: really important conjecture of math that was statistical in nature. So normally you talk about patterns like maybe the spacing between the primes has a certain regularity or something. but this was really something which didn't tell you exactly how many primes there were in any given range. It just gave you an approximation that got better and better as you went further and further out. But it helped. So it started the field of what we call analytic number theory. But it was the

[01:04:47] Terence Tao: first in many conjectures like this, many of which got proved, which sort of started consolidating the idea that the prime numbers actually didn't really have a pattern. They behaved like random sets of numbers with a certain density. I mean, they had some patterns, like they're almost all odd. And they're not actually random, they're what's called pseudo-random. There's no random number generation involved in creating the prime numbers. But over time it became more and more

[01:05:17] Terence Tao: productive to think of the primes as if they were just generated by some god rolling dice all the time and just creating this random set. And this allowed us to make all these other predictions. So there's still open conjecture in number theory called the twin prime conjecture, that there should be infinitely many pairs of primes that are twins distance to a part, like 11 and 13. We can't prove that, and there's actually good reasons why we can't prove it, but because of this statistical random model of the primes, we are absolutely convinced it's true. We know that if

[01:05:47] Terence Tao: the primes were sort of generated by flipping coins or something, just by random charts, just like infinite monkeys at a typewriter, we would see twin primes appear over and over again. And we have over time developed this very accurate conceptual model of what the primes should behave like based on statistics and probability, but it's all mostly heuristic and non-rigorous, but extremely accurate. So the few times when we actually can prove things about the primes has matched up with the predictions of what we call the random

[01:06:16] Terence Tao: model of the primes. So we have this conjectural concept framework for understanding the primes that everyone believes in. And it's the same reason why we believe the Riemann hypothesis is true, why we believe that cryptography based on the primes is mathematically secure. It's all part of this belief. In fact, one reason why we care about the Riemann hypothesis is that if the Riemann hypothesis failed, we knew it was false. It means

[01:06:46] Terence Tao: it would be a serious blow to this model. It would mean there's a secret patent for the primes that we were not aware of. And I think we would very rapidly abandon any cryptography based on the primes because if there was one patent that we didn't know about, there's probably more. And these patents can lead to exploits in crypto. It's going to be a big, big shock. So we really want to make sure that doesn't happen. So we've

[01:07:15] Terence Tao: been convinced of things like agreement hypothesis and things over time. But some of it is experimental evidence, some is the few times we've been able to make theoretical results, they've always aligned. It is possible that the consensus is wrong and we've all just missed something very basic. There have been paradigm shifts in the past in scientific history. But we don't really have a way of measuring this. I think partly because we don't have enough data on how

[01:07:44] Terence Tao: math or science develops. We have one timeline of history and we have like 100 stories of turning points in history. If we had access to a million alien civilizations and each of the different development of history and of science in different orders, then maybe we'd actually have a decent shot at an understanding of how do we measure what is progress and what is a good strategy. We could maybe start formalizing it

[01:08:14] Terence Tao: and having a framework. Maybe what we need to do is actually start creating lots of mini-universes or simulations of AI solving very basic problems in arithmetic or whatever, but coming off their own strategies for doing these things and having these little laboratories to test. There are people who investigate what's the smallest neural network that can do 10-digit application and things like that. I think we could actually learn a lot

[01:08:42] Terence Tao: from evolving small AIs on simple problems. We could learn a lot.

[01:08:48] Dwarkesh Patel: I was super excited when Mercury reached out about sponsoring the podcast because I've been banking with them for years. I think I opened my first account with them in 2023. Something I've come to appreciate over the last few years is that Mercury is constantly updating things and adding new features. Take their newest feature, Insights. Insights summarizes your money in and out, showing you your biggest transactions and calling out anything that deserves extra attention. Like maybe your revenue from a particular partner has gone down or you've got a big uncategorized purchase that needs to be investigated. It's a super low friction way for me to keep tabs on my business and make quick decisions.

[01:09:19] Dwarkesh Patel: For example, I tried to invest any cash that I don't need on hand to keep running the business. With Insights, with just a couple of clicks, I was able to see exactly how much money I spent in each month of 2025. And that lets me know exactly how much cash I'll need for the next year or so of operations, and then I can go invest the rest. Mercury just keeps adding new features like this. Go to mercury.com to check it out. Mercury is a fintech company, not an FDIC insured bank. Banking services provided through Choice Financial Group and Column NA members FDIC.

[01:09:48] Dwarkesh Patel: You have to learn about new fields not only very rapidly but deeply enough to contribute to the frontier. So in some sense you're also one of the world's greatest autodidacts. What is your process of learning, about a new subfield than math? What does that look like?

[01:10:06] Terence Tao: Yeah, so I certainly identify with kind of the depth and breadth before. And it's not purely human AI distinction. I mean, humans also split, I think it was Irving who split them into hedgehogs and foxes. Hedgehog knows one thing very, very well, and a fox knows a little bit about everything. So I definitely, I think of myself as a fox. I work with hedgehogs a lot, and sometimes I can be a hedgehog if need be.

[01:10:40] Terence Tao: I've always had a little bit of an obsessive streak. If there's something which I read about which I feel like I should understand, I have the capability to understand this, but I don't understand why it works. There's some magic in it. So someone was able to use a type of mathematics I'm not familiar with and get a result which I would like to prove, and I can't do it by myself, but they could do it by their method. Then I wanted to find out what was their trick. It bugs me that someone else can do something which I think I can do, but I can't. So I've always had that kind

[01:11:09] Terence Tao: of obsessive completionist type streak. I've had to wean myself off computer games because I start a game, I want to play it to completion, so both the levels. So that's one way in which I learn new fields. I collaborate with a lot of people who have taught me other types of mathematics. I just make friends with another mathematician who's working on another area of mathematics, and I find their problems interesting,

[01:11:38] Terence Tao: but they have to teach me some of the basic tricks and what's known and what's not known, and I learn a lot from that. I found that writing about my what I've learned. I have a blog where I sometimes record things that I've learned, because in the past, when I was younger, I would learn something and do this core trick and say, okay, I'm going to remember this. And six months later, I'd forgotten. I remember remembering it, but I can't reconstruct my arguments.

[01:12:08] Terence Tao: And the first few times it was so frustrating to have understood something and then lost it. I should always write down anything cool that I've learned. And this is part of how this blog came about. How long does it take you to write a blog post? It's something I often do when I don't want to do other work. You know, like there's some referee report or something. There's something that feels slightly unpleasant for me to do at the time. And so writing a blog, it feels creative and fun. It's something

[01:12:38] Terence Tao: that I do for myself. So maybe depending on the topic, it could be a quick half an hour or several hours. But it doesn't, because it's something that I do sort of voluntarily, it doesn't feel like it doesn't feel, time flies when I write these things, as opposed to doing something which I have to do for administrative reasons, but it's just that it's drudgery. Those are tasks that AI is really helping with nowadays.

[01:13:06] Dwarkesh Patel: Is it, if like civilization could from first principles decide how to use Terry Tau's time? You know, it's like a limited resource. What is the biggest diff between if the veal of ignorance got to decide how to use Terry Tau's time versus what it does now? This podcast wouldn't be happening.

[01:13:29] Terence Tao: As much as I complain about certain tasks that I don't want to do, but I have to do. So as you get more senior in academia, you get more and more responsibilities and more committees and whatever. But I have also found that a lot of events that I kind of reluctantly went to because I was obliged to for one reason or another, because it's outside my comfort zone, I often find interactions with people who I wouldn't normally talk to, like you for instance, and I would learn interesting things and have interesting

[01:13:59] Terence Tao: experiences and I would have opportunities to then network with other people that I would never have done before. So I do believe a lot in sensitivity. I mean, I do optimize my time when I, so there's some portions of my day where I do schedule very carefully, but I have been willing to sort of leave some portions just, okay, I'm going to do something which is not my usual thing and maybe it will be a

[01:14:29] Terence Tao: waste of my time, but maybe I will learn something. And more often than not, I feel like I've gotten a positive experience, which is not something I would have planned for. And so I believe a lot in serendipity. And maybe there's a danger actually that in the modern society, it's not just AI, but we've become really good at optimizing everything. And maybe we're not optimizing a lot of optimization.

[01:14:59] Terence Tao: With COVID, for example, we switched a lot to remote meetings and so everything was scheduled now. And so we kept busy, at least in academia, we met almost the same number of people that we met in person, but everything had to be planned. You had to schedule things in advance. And what we lost out on was the casual, knocking on the hallway, just meeting someone while getting a coffee. And there's

[01:15:30] Terence Tao: serendipitous interactions that you may think are not optimal, but actually are really important. When I was a grad student, I would go down to the library to look for a journal article. I had to physically go down to the library, check out the journal and read your article. And sometimes the next article, you can just browse through. And the next article is also interesting. Sometimes it wasn't, but you could accidentally find interesting things, which is something which has basically been lost now because you can just type in,

[01:15:59] Terence Tao: if you want to access an article now, you just type it into a search engine or even an AI and you can get instantly what you want, but you don't get the accidental things that you might have gotten if you'd done it more inefficiently. So, yeah, there have been times when I spent a year once at the Institute for Advanced Study, which is a great place to, you know, there's no distractions, you're there to just do research. And like the

[01:16:29] Terence Tao: first few weeks you're there, like it's great, you're getting all these papers written up that you've been wanting to do for a long time, you've been thinking about problems for blocks of hours of a time. But I find if I stay there for more than several months, I run out of inspiration somehow, I get bored, I actually surf the internet a lot more. You actually do need a certain level of distraction in your life. It somehow adds enough randomness and temperature, high temperature if you need. So yeah,

[01:16:59] Terence Tao: I don't know the optimal way to schedule my life. It just seems to work.

[01:17:04] Dwarkesh Patel: I'm very curious when you expect AIs that can actually do frontier math better than at least as well as the

[01:17:14] Terence Tao: best human mathematicians. I mean, in some ways they're already doing frontier math that is super intelligent that humans can't do, but it's a different frontier from what we're used to. I mean, you could argue that calculators were doing frontier math that humans could not accomplish, but it wasn't number crunching it. But replacing Terry Tao completely. I mean, what do you want me for? You'll just

[01:17:43] Dwarkesh Patel: go on all the podcasts after.

[01:17:47] Terence Tao: I'm not sure. It might not be the right question to ask. I think within a decade, a lot of things that math students currently do, we spend a lot of the bulk of our time doing it and a lot of stuff we put in our papers today can be done by AI. But we will find that that actually wasn't the most important part of what we do. You know,

[01:18:17] Terence Tao: 100 years ago, a lot of mathematicians were just solving differential equations. People needed, physicists needed some exact solution to some system and they hired a mathematician to go through the calculus and work out the solution to this fluid equation or whatever. A lot of what a 19th century mathematician would do, you could make a call to Mathematica or Wolfram Alpha or a computer algebra package or now more recently an AI and it would

[01:18:47] Terence Tao: just solve the problem in a few minutes. But we moved on. We worked on different types of problems after that. Once computers came along, computers used to be human. People used to liberally create log tables and work out primes as Gauss did and that has all been outsourced to computers. But we moved on. In genetics, to sequence the genome of a single organism, that was an entire

[01:19:16] Terence Tao: PhD of a geneticist. So carefully separating all the chromosomes and whatever. And now you can just spend $1,000 and send it to a sequencer and get it done. But genetics is not dead as a subject. You move to a different scale. Maybe you study whole ecosystems rather than individuals.

[01:19:33] Dwarkesh Patel: I take your point. But on the question of when is most mathematical progress, almost all mathematical progress happening by AI? So if you find out, oh, this year a millennium price problem has been solved, you would put a 95% odds that an AI did it autonomously. Surely there will be such a year.

[01:19:53] Terence Tao: I guess. I mean, I do believe that hybrid human plus AIs will dominate mathematics for a lot longer. But it will require some additional breakthroughs beyond what we already have. So it's going to be sarcastic. I think AI is currently very good at certain things, but really terrible at others. And while you can add more and more frameworks on top to reduce the error rates and make them

[01:20:22] Terence Tao: work with each other a bit more and so forth, it feels like we don't have all the ingredients to really have a truly satisfactory replacement for all intellectual tasks. It is complementary currently. It is not a replacement. But maybe I mean, because current level AIs will accelerate science in so many

[01:20:52] Terence Tao: ways, hopefully new discoveries, new breakthroughs will happen more quickly. I mean, it is possible that also by somehow just destroying serendipity, we actually inhibit certain types of progress. Anything is possible, really, at this point. I think the world is very unpredictable at this point in time.

[01:21:13] Dwarkesh Patel: What is your advice to somebody who would consider a career in math or is early in a career in math, especially in light of AI progress? How should they be thinking about their career differently, if at all, as a result of AI progress?

[01:21:28] Terence Tao: Yeah, so we live in a time of change. It is, as I said, we live in a particularly unpredictable era. And I think things that we've taken for granted for centuries may not hold anymore. So, yeah, the way we do everything, not just mathematics, will change. And, you know, so I think,

[01:21:58] Terence Tao: which is, you know, I mean, in many ways, I would prefer the much more boring, quiet era where things are much the same as they were 10 years ago, 20 years ago. But, so I think one just has to embrace that there's going to be a lot of change and that, you know, the things that you study, some of them may become obsolete or revolutionized, but some things will be retained. And,

[01:22:25.120 --> 01:22:25.600] and,

[01:22:25] Terence Tao: so you somehow always have to keep an eye on, like, there'll be a lot of opportunities for things that you wouldn't be able to do before. So, I mean, in math, you know, you previously had to basically go through years and years of education, be a math PhD before you could contribute to the frontier of math research. But now it's quite possible at the high school level or whatever that you could get involved in math project and actually make a real contribution because of all these AI tools and lean and everything else.

[01:22:56] Terence Tao: So there'll be a lot of non-traditional opportunities to learn. So you need a very adaptable mindset. You know, there'll be pursuing things just for curiosity, for playing around, and, I mean, you still need to get your credentials for, I mean, thank you for a while it would still be important to sort of still go through traditional education and learn math and science the old fashioned way for a while. But,

[01:23:26] Terence Tao: yeah, but you should also be open to very, very different ways of doing science, some of which don't exist yet. Yeah, so it's a scary time but also very exciting.

[01:23:40] Dwarkesh Patel: Awesome, that's a great note to close on. Thanks so much. Yeah, pleasure.